I now give the floor to His Excellency Karamoko John Mary Traore, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso. Thank you. Mr. President, Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen, It's a real honour to bring from this rostrum the voices of their excellencies, Comrade Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso, Head of State and President of the Confederation of Sahel States, Army General Asimi Goita, President of the Transition, Head of State of the Republic of Mali, and Army General Abdurahmani Tiani, President of the Republic of Niger, Head of State. On their behalf, the Confederation of Sahel States extends to you, Mr. President, their heartfelt congratulations upon your election to preside over the 81st session of the UN General Assembly. We also extend our wishes of success to you in your term and fully align with the pride of the kindred people of Bangladesh. To Her Excellency, Ms. Annalena Baerbock, we reiterate our positive appreciation of the way she conducted the work of the 18th session. President, it is with my heart full of the memory of thousands of children, women and men from Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger, innocent victims of terrorism, that I am taking the floor here this morning. But it is also with a sense of pride inspired by the resilience of the populations of the Sahel and the hope of the bravery of the defence and security forces of the Confederation as well as the crucial role played by volunteers for the defence of the homeland that I am speaking here and having the noble mission of delivering this statement. I also wish to pay tribute to the families in mourning to the long-suffering communities and all of those whose lives have been affected by terrorist barbarism. For more than a decade this blind and sustained violence has been sustained, armed, financed and instrumentalised by criminal networks and their supporters intent on subjugating the Sahel through fear but they must understand that they will never succeed here. I bow down with profound respect before the memory of the Defence and Security Forces of the Confederation of Sahel States, our volunteers, defence volunteers working for the motherland and all patriotic forces who have fallen in the field of honour. evoking their memory i spare a thought and pay tributes to army general sadio camara who was assassinated murdered cowardly on the 24th of april 2026 and pay tribute to his commitment to peace and to mali and the sahel the supreme sacrifice that our heroes have made is a seed of liberty of justice and sovereignty that our oppressed peoples aspire to it is the source that nourishes our determination on a daily basis to recover the integrity of our territories, to defend our dignity and to ensure our sacred rights live free in peace and security. To the people of the Confederation of the States of the Sahel, including its diaspora, I pay tribute and renew my pride in them. Courage, resilience, commitment and mobilisation, as they are showing each and every day supporting the efforts of the heads of state of the AES Confederation remain the centre of gravity of our journey towards sovereignty and stability and development. To all of the peoples of Africa and the world who share our struggle and who recognise themselves and the ideals of peace, dignity and liberty that the Confederation represents, I reiterate my gratitude. Mr President, The confederal dynamic that has been engaged in and taken up by our states, far from being an act in isolation, brings forward the rejection of fatality and chronic wardship that we face, as well as the reject of selective criticism when we see human tragedies. It's the sign of a shared willingness of our states to escape the vicious cycle of structural domination and exploitation that are profoundly rooted in the colonial and neo-colonialist legacies. In it, it carries the hope of a renaissance of the central Sahel that for too long has been devalued and disregarded. The new course embarked on since the 16th of September 2023 by adopting the charter of Liptakoguma, consolidated by the creation of the Confederation of Sahel States on the 6th of July 2024, ushered in a new era for the people of the AES. and each area of land recovered, each terrorist base destroyed, each battle won over the forces of evil, each school recovered, each village rebuilt, each reform initiated, brings us closer to this new horizon defended with determination by Comrade Captain Ibrahim Trawe, Army General Asimi Goita and General Abdul-Hamani Tiani. under their enlightened leadership against the winds and the tides the alliance of Sahel states is consolidating itself every day taking charge of its own destiny a destiny of dignity, prosperity and freedom and justice and this is affirmed thanks to the mobilisation of a people over a common space with a shared destiny one people, one space, one destiny this motto guides each and every one of our actions and is embodied by the operationalisation of the unified force of the Confederation and is also embodied by the creation of the Confederal Bank Investment Bank and Development Bank and is embodied by the consolidation of relations between all of the different institutions of the countries of the AES as well as strengthening the historic centuries-long links between the communities and the vital forces of our space. Finally, this motto is part of diplomatic cohesion between three states shown by this speech made on behalf of the states of the AES Confederation, on behalf of the peoples of the Confederation and on behalf of the diaspora of the Confederation. Mr President, the Alliance of Sahel States welcomes the theme of this session of the General Assembly Restoring Trust, Managing Transformation, a United Nations that delivers for all Now this theme is an undeniable admission It's an admission of an erosion of trust between the members of the organisation double standards, biased positions, institutionalised injustice and the instrumentalisation of institutions and procedures and it's admission that our organisation is struggling to adapt to the changes the huge changes that we're seeing of a world in constant evolution and an admission that our organisation unfortunately is no longer there for everyone but belongs more and more to actors chosen according to their power and their vested interests. The promises of hope enshrined in the United Nations Charter, which extol peace, are disregarded. International law is being martyred and tortured by members whose propensity for domination, neocolonialism and hegemony is all too evidence. Yes, we need to rebuild trust. It's an ambition that we all share. But this suggests that our organisation has to stop being the microphone or an organisation that upholds some powerful actors in order to become the common house of all of the peoples, equal in dignity, equal in rights and equal in sovereignty. It's in light of this and what's taking place in the Sahel that we are taking part in these deliberations. For the Confederation, rebuilding trust must go hand in hand with the immediate interest of dealing with state support for terrorists, because terrorism must not continue to be a tool of foreign policy on the part of certain powers. The Confederation of Sahel States does not just face a simple sum of isolated terrorist groups. We face a persistent enterprise of destabilisation supported by considerable means and focused against the right of our people to live in peace, to choose their leaders and to have control over their resources and fully exercise their sovereignty. The terrorist attacks in particular the ones perpetrated on the 25th of April and 4th of July in 2026 in the Republic of Mali on the 18th of June and the 29th and 30th of August 2026 in the Republic of Niger fully illustrate this phenomenon. And let us call a spade a spade and say things clearly. The supply chains, the technical capacities and coordinated use of conventional means do not come out of nowhere. Behind the murderous acts of these terrorists, there are structured support, including state support. and we call on the international community to look at this clearly, to investigate seriously and to condemn, without any geopolitical calculations, all actors that finance, arm, provide intelligence to and protect terrorists. Silence in the face of such actions is not prudence but complicity. Mr. President's rebuilding trust must also go hand in hand with the strict respect for the sovereignty of states must go hand in hand with the development of partnerships and not servitude and go hand in hand with justice over outdated neocolonious principles anything that goes against the instrumentalisation of certain international defence mechanisms to defend human rights to put political pressure on our countries like what the European Parliament did to justify a potential neo-colonial offensive through resolutions, misfounded resolutions against the Sahel, all of this is unacceptable Mr. President, confidence will not be reborn in an organisation where some actors tolerate arbitrary behaviour and the promotion and protection of fundamental rights for our states is an absolute responsibility. and we are engaging in this in a context of extreme violence imposed against our populations by terrorists when our state adopts exceptional measures as strictly contained by our national legislation and our international obligations. The idea is to protect the population, to preserve public order and guarantee national security. The most important human right is the right to life, the right of a people to not live under terror. we see that these measures are often subject to selective biased lectures from others without sufficient consideration for the realities on the grounds the confederation reaffirms its commitments to impartial objective and non-selective treatment of human rights we call for dialogue based on mutual respect good faith and factual rigor we accept impartial and objective reviews but we do reject political processes and being tried in the Court of Political Appeal. Yes, to respect the law, but we reject its instrumentalisation. This is precisely due to these grave shortfalls, persistent selectivity and manifest politicisation that our states made a sovereign decision to withdraw from the International Criminal Court and formally notified our withdrawal from the Rome Statutes. International justice, yes. However, variable justice, no. The Confederation remains committed to multilateral, interbendant institutions that are impartial and credible. Mr. President, the Confederation of Sahel States is standing up against domination, exploitation and disregard. We adhere to the vision of a rehabilitated Africa with our dignity recovered, choosing our own path and freeing ourselves from the states, from the constraints rather, of a bygone era to be the masters of our own destiny. In this regard, the Confederation of Sahel States welcomes the adoption in March 2026 by the General Assembly of the resolution recognising the transatlantic slave trade of enslaved Africans and the system of racial servitude as the gravest crime against humanity. This is the forum to reiterate our warm congratulations to the high-level authorities of the Republic of Ghana and all of the Afro-descendant communities who brought this file to the United Nations for everyone to support it to make this decisive step forward towards justice. This historic recognition, which is part of a noble process, must open the way to truth, memory, reparation and real change in the international dynamics that we inherited from slavery and colonisation. It's also appropriate to welcome the recent adoption just three weeks ago on the 4th of September of Resolution AATL 104 seeking to give Africa its right size on the map. we also congratulate the high level authorities of the Togolese Republic for bringing this forward with foresightedness and the advocacy that allowed this legitimate victory to succeed we applaud them for that Mr President in terms of international peace and security, our world remains up against multiplication of armed conflicts, the emergence of new crises and a return to the principle of might is right. Unilateral approaches, unlawful sanctions, selective interventions and double standards weakened the international order and put the multilateral system to test. The Confederation of Sahel states calls for an immediate end to violence against civilian populations, unhindered humanitarian access and a just and lasting political solution. The inability of the Security Council to prevent or resolve in a lasting way these crises reveals the limits of a system that too often protects the interests of powers to the detriment of human life. On the development file, the Confederation remains concerned over the aggravation of climate vulnerabilities, the multiplication of humanitarian crises, the malicious use of technology and ICTs for manipulation and destabilisation. The conclusions of the high-level political forum of July 2026 confirmed that the international community remains far away from achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Four years before the 2030 deadline, we no longer have any time left to make nice statements. It's now time to act to provide equitable financing and achieve economic justice. In light of these challenges, collective ambitious responses with solidarity are necessary. The Pat for the Future, the Compromissos de Sevilla, the Doha Programme of Action, the UNAT Initiative and the OASO Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries can contribute to making the multilateral system more effective, more inclusive and more focused on results as long as they do not just remain promises. Our priorities must be clearly defined, reducing the digital gap, strengthening climate resilience, investing in human capital, consolidating and strengthening educational health systems, supporting industrialisation, ensuring the effective participation of youth and women in decision-making. International solidarity is necessary, however, the experience of the AES also shows that the mobilisation of domestic resources as supporting trust, national solidarity and the participation of citizens is the best tool available for freeing up our economic potential. Mr President, the Confederation of Sahel State supports the initiatives engaged in as part of the UNAT initiative, convinced that our organisation must undergo profound transformations in order to respond to contemporary challenges. However, reform should not be a pretext to further reduce the presence of the United Nations in different countries. It must be political, democratic and courageous in the way that it redistributes votes, responsibilities and powers. the reform of the security council um is something that we that must not be delayed is necessary to strengthen transparency accountability put an end to double standards to adapt this body to geopolitical reality the confederation reaffirms its support for the etselwini consensus and the sitz declaration the credibility of the organization will the The credibility of the UN will depend on its ability to ensure that the charter, international law and the sovereign equality of states are fully respected with the same rigour without distinction. In this regard, the Confederation reiterates our appeal to lift all unilateral coercive actions that are against international law, including the embargo imposed against the Republic of Cuba. reform of global governments must also transform the international financial architecture more equitable representation for developing countries in international financial institutions fair treatment of debt access to real financing for development more equitable international trade and respect for national priorities mr president the aes confederation remains resolutely committed to working alongside all member states of the United Nations to achieve a more just, equitable international order with more solidarity based on the dignity of peoples, sovereign equality of states, international justice and the peaceful settlement of disputes. However, our cooperation will never be a synonym of submission and our openness will never mean abandoning our own vital interests. It's only if these conditions are met that we will be able to restore confidence and trust between our nations to make our organisation credible again and to offer present and future generations a safer, more prosperous world that is more respectful of the aspirations of all peoples. President, heads of delegation, ladies and gentlemen, In our national capacity, I wish to draw the attention of this august assembly to some thoughts, some considerations on the situation in my country. Burkina Faso is engaged in a dynamic of deep-seated transformation spearheaded by progressive popular revolution. At the time where we are beginning to commemorate our fourth anniversary, we must underscore the progress made in several areas in life in our country. On an economic level, the Kino Faso is resolutely pursuing its efforts to undertake structural transformations of our economy and to achieve developments that is based more on our own priorities and potentials. In synergy with other member states of the Confederation, our country is working to strengthen our productive capacities, to harness our natural resources and to further promote local processing of raw materials. In agriculture and industry, particularly, significant presidential initiatives are being implemented to stimulate national production, to create jobs and to strengthen the participation of our populations in our economic activity. Under the leadership of Comrade Captain Ibrahim Traore, President of Faso, Burkina Faso has made a choice to place the people at the heart of all endeavours, encouraging the creation of new production units and processing units by encouraging better use of our resources. and through these initiatives, with six great presidential initiatives, our economy is becoming more dynamic and progressively being strengthened. Our ambition is to strengthen the bases for local lasting and inclusive development while pursuing the deep-seated reform and renewal of our society and strengthening our economic sovereignty. This transformation also includes infrastructure. The Rolosse 2026-2030 plan in this regard is a major framework to deliver this approach and to support the changes that are currently underway in our country. By relying first and foremost on our own forces and respecting the choice to exploit and process our resources locally, we intend to create more value within our economy and to ensure that the wealth of our country benefit our population as a priority. On a security level, Burkina Faso, in coordination with the countries of our Confederation, is pursuing efforts to re-establish peace, lasting peace, security, social cohesion and all of these across our country. More than 74% of our national territory is now under our control. Our Defence and Security Forces, as well as the volunteers for the defence of the homeland, are continuing their operations against terrorist groups and criminal gangs. These changes are being delivered specifically by winning back several villages and areas. the progressive return of thousands of people to their places of residence, the reopening of tens of schools, as well as returning to normal activity in healthcare centres and progressive reinstallation of the government. This progress continues to consolidate and it's the result of efforts and sacrifices made by our people, as well as the commitment of all actors to re-establish peace and security. Mr President, in the Middle East we remain particularly concerned over the situation faced by the Palatinean people and the suffering endured by the civilian population in Gaza. In the face of this tragedy Burkina Faso reaffirms its commitment to a lasting political solution based on coexistence between two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security in line with international law and relevant resolutions of the United Nations. Burkina Faso also remains concerned by the consequence of unilateral coercive measures imposed against certain states like Cuba and Nicaragua and the repercussions of these have a terrible effect on the populations. We call therefore for prioritising dialogue, cooperation and mutual respect between these states. On the question of Western Sahara, Burkina Faso, true to the principles enshrined in the UN Charter, reaffirms its commitment to the political process led under the auspices of the United Nations Secretary-General and based on the autonomy plan proposed by the Kingdom of Morocco. We encourage the continuation of efforts to reach a negotiated political solution between the parties pursuant to relevant resolutions of the Security Council. We furthermore reaffirm our commitments to the One China Principle. President, through these different considerations, Burkina Faso wishes to reaffirm an essential conviction. That is that our organisation will never be able to fully respond to the challenges of our time unless it remains true to the principles that led to its founding, the principles in force when the organisation was created. We remain convinced that through dialogue, solidarity and determination, the United Nations, together with our people, will be able to overcome the challenges that we face and to build the foundations for a future of peace, dignity and shared prosperity. One people, one space, one destiny. Long live the Confederation of Sahel States. Standing strong. Long live Sahel. Long live United Africa. motherland or death we will prevail thank you I thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso
