The Assembly will hear an address by his Excellency Rodriguez Paz Perreira, constitutional president of the plurinational state of Bolivia. I request protocol to escort his Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Thank you. Mr. President of the Assembly, Mr. Secretary General, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a great honor to be with you for the first time as Constitutional President of Bolivia. And I would like to begin by talking not about the government, but rather the people, the Bolivian people, the homeland, a people that has gone through difficult times, a people that knows poverty, but also that knows the meaning of work, that knows division, but also knows how to recognize one another in unity. that has been through economic, political crises, social conflicts and times of uncertainty, but which has never lost sight of something fundamental, and that is the hope of building a better life, I come from a country that today is facing a reality that we cannot hide. But first of all, allow me to say one thing. A part of those 20 years of the reality of a country that has been dragged along is due to the consequences of a time of ideological construction on our continent, in the case of part of South America, where one leader came here and said, this smells of sulfur. It was part of a political and ideological line which was being built upon by another leader who brought a coca leaf here, and he turned a traditional leaf into a historic leaf, a leaf that is part of our culture. He turned it into a betrayal so that construction and development and the vision of the development of a nation would be betrayed. Today, the The Bolivian economy in 2026 had inflation of more than 20 percent, but it was a country that was an energy power in gas and hydrocarbons and mining. Nevertheless, we were reduced to a country that now has to be negotiating with multilateral institutions and with various different nations. And that is not right. They said that they were socialists. However, we carried out a campaign 10 months ago, in the 10 months since I've been president, with the concept of capitalism for all, of resources, financial capacities, being able to invest and develop. Socialism and ideology does not put food on the table. What does is employment and the development of our economies and our production. When I took on the challenge of government, there were $51 million in our reserves because the reserves of the central bank had been entirely liquidated. Now, 10 months on, we have nearly $1.2 billion, and we, by the end of the year, are heading towards nearly $4 billion, and in the following 18 months, nearly $10 billion. For many nations, that might not be much, but for Bolivia, it is a record, a milestone, a challenge, and a process of construction to build, strengthen our democracy, and to strengthen our productive model within the country. I say this clearly, being able to look at the reality in my country, which decided to engage in a change and a transformation, and to not turn back to the past. We are indeed doing this. We are ordering our economy. We are putting our house in order. We are facing up to the shortage of fuel. We are rebuilding our reserves. We are reforming our institutions. We are trying to restore internal and external trust in the country. We are doing something that we thought was even more important. We are trying to restore that trust in Bolivians so that we can move forward. Because a nation that does not rebuild its trust cannot move ahead with money alone, with clear rules, with labor, with institutions that work, education, security and justice. It's one thing to have a government, which we do have. It's quite another thing to have governability, which we do now have, because the parliament is now drafting and approving laws. And governance is yet another thing. Governability and governance are not the same things. And in governance, there was a deep-rooted danger that we should denounce in this space of the United Nations. For 53 days, there were blockages of roads in Bolivia, blocking access to health care and education. More than 20 people died, and this was financed by narco-terrorism and by drug trafficking. and a helpless, defenseless state that was unable to generate economic and human resources to be able to fight that narco-terrorism, narco-trafficking, which was financing it. Protest and the right to demand a better life is one thing. The right to demand a decent life, better health care, education, and infrastructure. It is quite another thing to want to break the constitutional and democratic framework of our nations. That is why those mafias that do not have constitutions, that do not have laws and do not have to report their resources, they are mafias that are using organized crime and using resources, be it drug trafficking, smuggling or gold. It doesn't matter the source of that money. What is important to them is destroying constitutions, destroying democracies and destroying social stability. That is why Bolivia is fighting to overcome this crisis and be able to produce and export. We want investment, employment, technology. We want resources. We want to integrate into the world. We want to do that while also preserving something that no economic growth can replace, and that is its people, its territory, and its extraordinary biological diversity. Ladies and gentlemen, Bolivia has one specific feature, which is also perhaps an opportunity. We are a country with a small population but with vast diversity. The Andes, the Altiplano, the Amazon. We make up 60% of the water that the Amazon receives comes from Bolivia, one of the greatest cultural wealths of the continent and the world, and not just from one culture, many cultures within a single nation. And we have strategic natural resources which could be important for the energy and technological transition for the world. Each of the cell phones, the mobile phones that you have here in the room today, 10% of the tin that is in those cell phones comes from Bolivian tin. We have the capacity to provide the world with the resources that it needs to be able to develop a better world. Bolivia does not want to repeat the history of countries that exported their natural resources for decades and remained poor. We do not simply want to extract minerals from the earth so that other countries can add value to them. The ideology, and this is very important, I spoke earlier about organized crime and the mafia. In Bolivia, we have discovered, and we are telling the world, the ideology of corruption is part and parcel of the destruction of knowledge, technology, research, infrastructure, and knowing how to properly make use of capital. The ideology of corruption runs counter to development. It runs counter to our democracies. For that reason, we must overthrow the ideological concept of corruption. We want partners that understand that an investment is not just a transfer of funds, of money. We want a long-term relationship with jobs, training, technology, infrastructure, productivity, a future. That is why Bolivia is open to the world and we want the world to come to Bolivia. But we are open with dignity, not based on demagogical speeches, based on our past. What Bolivia wants is a firm and strong future, respecting our traditions and our original and indigenous peoples, but also giving them opportunities to grow with dignity and to develop our nations. Bolivia wants to enter partnerships, to compete, to learn, and it is also open to contributing. This historic moment has seen a discussion that we can no longer postpone. The transition to energy diversification. It's not so much a transition in and of itself, but rather diversifying our energy. The world needs cleaner energy sources, but it also needs minerals, lithium, copper, other critical minerals. It needs new supply chains, and it needs to do that in a responsible way. And Bolivia wants to be a part of that conversation. But we would like to raise a question. Can the global energy diversification really be just if the countries that possess strategic resources continue to primarily export them as raw materials? No. That is why we want to enter into partnerships and open ourselves up to the world as a society, as partners, and not just as a source of raw materials. The energy transition also needs to represent productive diversification. It should create opportunities for producing countries. It should generate local capacities, respect the environment. It should incorporate and include communities, and it should allow our young people to be actors in those new industries. That is why we are proposing a new international relationship around strategic resources, a relationship that is based on investment, knowledge, technology, and added value. The United Nations, well, Bolivia is a country with one of the greatest forest reserves in the world. In the last 10 years, we've gone from 57 percent of a territory which in the world represented forest reserves to less than 50 percent of that. reforestation and the environment should be a priority for us. In my country, there was a president who talked about the Pachamama, which is God on earth, and nevertheless, for the last 20 years, they have been destroying it. I think the Pachamama has changed its opinion now. It wants to grow and it wants to be taken care of, but it also wants an answer for its original peoples, its indigenous peoples, and the peoples of this region so that they can benefit from this care shown to the Pachamama. Bolivia cannot ask the world to protect our forests if we don't do our fair share as well. That is why we have already implemented various laws and norms which will be part of what Bolivia does among itself and with the world. The protection of the Amazon is a national responsibility, but it is also an international one. We want to conserve the Amazon, and for that reason, with neighboring countries that make up that Amazon region. We need to reach agreements. We cannot allow continued predating predatory activities on our Amazon, which is the lung of the world. Ladies and gentlemen, there are other challenges, which I believe to be inseparable from the future of our nations. The fight against organized crime, as I have already said, organized crime has various different sources of financing to finance myself. I had to ask multilaterals. I had to ask for resources that come late or sometimes never arrive because the slow procedures that those multilateral organizations have mean that organized crime has an advantage when it comes to getting resources from drug trafficking, drug terrorism, or the smuggling of gold to then destabilize our democracies. That is why multilateralism has to act much more immediately. It cannot be the case that $1 billion or $3 billion is the value of a democracy in crisis. Democracy is the priority in order to establish relations between our nations. The United Nations is built upon and based upon democracy, based upon respect for laws and having clear laws, having constitutions. But we have suffered from the attack of these narco-terrorists for 53 days again now. We have used dialogue and the technique and technology of peace. They wanted confrontation. They wanted blood on the streets. We instead offered dialogue and the technique of peace. And that same technique of peace which I ask countries at war to use to end confrontations. Because when there is war in the world, those that suffer the most are the poor. When there is war in the world, it is the poor that suffer the most with fuel prices, energy, the cost of living. I'm welcome for this opportunity for Bolivia to be with you and to express our concerns. I will conclude by talking about Pan and Santa Cruz, two departments, and Cochabamba as well, which in September, this is the anniversary of those nine departments. But I would also like to express my fond affection to young Bolivians. Young Bolivians, just like the young people in all of the nations of the United Nations, need to find the meaning and purpose of their lives. Our nations need to give our young people that purpose. There will be the United Nations, Bolivia and countries in the future if we give that meaning to our young people, a meaning and a purpose in their lives, the very reason for being. I am and I am here to be part of building a society. That is why in these difficult moments that we are experiencing now, we are working in particular to ensure that young people have a purpose. They want to build the fatherland. They want to build our nation and want to be part of the United Nations as a concept of United Nations so that we can cooperate, work together. And to be firm in that conviction, to be able to carry out a form of transformation and bring change to our work as a nation. I believe we need to build a new agenda an agenda of energy, critical minerals industrialization, infrastructure, digitalization water, biodiversity, food security education, health, gender science, technology, connectivity and other things a new agenda for humanity and we must debate that and discuss it because changes, digitalization is changing things very rapidly and changing our ability to understand what is happening in our countries. I am the product of digitalization. I conducted my campaign on social networks alone. I didn't use campaign experts. I didn't use millions of dollars for my campaign. It was only networks. And that is why urgent responses are needed to the challenges facing our nation. Thank you very much for this opportunity given to Bolivia. Bolivia today in this assembly. As I said, not everything has been resolved. We're just getting started. But Bolivia will never be on its knees. It will always stand tall. It will always stand up and be ready to walk forward and move ahead. I would like to thank each of the departments in my homeland and tell you that Bolivia is the homeland that never abandons us. The United Nations should also be the space that never abandons our homelands. This is the space for consolidating our democracy. This is the place where we can consolidate them against organized crime. This is the place where we can strengthen them for development. We have agreed to be part of the Shield of the Americas, but we have also agreed to be part of the Santiago Agreement to ensure that our democracies have security and certainty and to provide them with progress and with a future. We never give in. Long live the home and dammit. Long live Bolivia. Thank you, United Nations. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Constitutional President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia. Thank you.
