I now give the floor to Your Excellency Anita Anon, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada. Mr. President, Excellencies, colleagues and friends, bonjour. I was born in Nova Scotia on Canada's east coast and grew up there, the daughter of immigrants. Nova Scotians all know the same thing. The tide does not wait. You must move with it. The tide has turned in the global order as well. As Canadian historian Margaret Macmillan has observed, we have arrived in a new age of disorder. We are facing a rupture, not a transition. Great powers are walking away from global economic cooperation, dismantling economic integration. Great powers want the rest of us to accept what we are offered. And too often, state sovereignty, the cornerstone of the UN Charter, has been treated with disdain. We are facing serious challenges in the global order. But at their core, Canadians and billions of others around the world want to live peaceful, prosperous and predictable lives. That is why, in the face of this rupture, Canada's goal is to achieve greater strategic autonomy. Greater autonomy to make our own choices and to determine our own sovereign future. We can no longer afford to be overly reliant on any one partner. Instead, we are diversifying our ties and building stronger relationships with new and old partners alike, so that our people can enjoy peace and prosperity. We will prioritize decisive, effective action by forging issue-based coalitions of nations that share a sense of urgency on common challenges. We believe that these coalitions are the most flexible, effective and immediate way to address emerging global challenges. We are already forming these coalitions with small states, middle powers and great powers alike. Through the Coalition of the Willing, Canada is working with over 30 allies and partners to bolster Ukraine and defend against further Russian aggression. And in regional groupings like the Arctic 7 and the Nordic Baltic 8, Canada and our Arctic allies are cooperating to keep our region stable and secure. To this end, I welcome Secretary Rubio's convening of the Arctic 7 earlier this week. Alors, at a time when we are forming new coalitions, we should also strengthen the multilateral system. This is why Canada and our partners throughout the entire world have started a new initiative entitled Partners for Multilateralism. This initiative seeks to support United Nations reform and reform of other institutions to make them more representative, more effective and more trustworthy. to a policy of values-based realism. Understanding the world as it is, we will make the right choices for Canadians while being guided by our values. We will diversify our ties. We will work with trusted partners to strengthen our strategic capabilities, especially in emerging technologies, critical minerals, defense production, and clean and conventional energy. And we will lead other middle powers to act collectively and decisively, because middle powers are playing a key role in building the framework for the new international order, which is being established as we speak. In the economic realm, Canada is focused on what we can control, building a stronger economy, diversifying our trade, and catalyzing a trillion dollars of investment in Canada over the next five years. We are exploring new opportunities with partners in the Indo-Pacific, the Gulf region and Latin America. This includes building renewed partnerships with large economies like India and China. We are strengthening ties between Canada and Europe. Alongside the European Union, we are building an alliance for the future. Thanks to our strategy for Africa, we are boosting our trade links with our African partners. We are making concrete progress. Canadian exports to markets outside of North America have significantly increased. Last year, Canada has secured more than 20 new economic and defence partnerships. And at the first ever Canada Investment Summit earlier this month, we secured nearly $500 billion in new financing commitments to investment in Canada. As an energy superpower, we are providing energy supplies to many of our partners around the world, while supporting the transition to a more environmentally sustainable future. Because in a rapidly changing world, Canada is a reliable partner. And we are ready to work together. We are also ready to work together on enhancing international security. Canada is stepping up and taking greater responsibility for our own defence. We are making the largest defence investments in generations, allocating over $80 billion in last year's federal budget. We are now spending over 2% of our GDP on defence, and we are building toward NATO's 5% pledge by 2035. These investments are strengthening our ability to protect Canada and to contribute to peace and security around the world. Canada is an Arctic nation, and the Arctic is central to our identity, our security, and our future. The Arctic is a region of growing competition, and for many Canadians, it is simply home. This is why we are investing in Arctic security in consultation with Indigenous peoples. Their participation is a key element of our commitment to reconciliation. As we mark the 30th anniversary of the Arctic Council, we continue to strive for a region of cooperation. And to this end, Canada has opened a new consulate in Nuuk, Greenland, and we are strengthening our ties with our Arctic partners. Canada welcomes the recent agreement between Greenland, Denmark, and the United States to strengthen security in Greenland and the High North. This agreement is yet another reminder that North America and Europe are stronger together. And as a founding member of NATO, our commitment to the transatlantic alliance is ironclad. Alongside our NATO allies, Canada remains resolute in our support for Ukraine. We share Ukraine's commitment to restoring a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, one based on respect for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Canada is dedicated to advancing the unconditional return of Ukrainian children, unlawfully detained civilians and prisoners of war. Next week, I will host with Norway and Ukraine a conference on this urgent issue in Toronto. And Canada, with Ukraine, will continue to work together to support safe and secure navigation in the Black Sea by strengthening Ukraine's port infrastructure and disrupting and deterring the illegal activities of Russia's shadow fleet. Canada is also a Pacific nation, and we are absolutely committed to a free, open, and inclusive Indo-Pacific region. We have increased our naval presence in the Indo-Pacific and are offering the Dark Vessel Detection Program to our partners. We will continue to implement UN Security Council sanctions against North Korea, and by working with our regional partners, we are cracking down on transnational crime, including scam centres. Canada's position on Iran is unequivocal. Iran is the principal threat to peace and security in its region. It must never acquire a nuclear weapon. Its threats to navigation rights in the Strait of Hormuz are a direct affront to international law. We join our Gulf and European partners in strongly condemning Iran's attacks in the region. And Canada is deploying every available tool, including targeted sanctions that I announced this week, to confront the Iranian regime's abhorrent behavior. at the United Nations, Canada will again lead the resolution in this very room, in the General Assembly, on human rights in Iran, because we stand firmly with the Iranian people against repression and for human rights, dignity, and aspirations for a better life. Near a home, the people of Haiti deserve stability, security and the opportunity to build a better future. We commend the many countries who propose their assistance to the gang suppression force, in particular the United States. Even if the population in Haiti is still facing significant challenges, we're encouraged by the measures taken by the government of Haiti to prepare for the elections, a sign of progress and hope. throughout the world, Canada will remain a voice that can be trusted to defend maritime security, international law, and the responsible development of artificial intelligence. We will continue to speak out against the unacceptable rise in hatred, including anti-Semitism and Islamophobia. which are plagues that our countries must fight together. We were tragically reminded of the scourge of anti-Semitism again when a gunman carried out an attack on a synagogue in Belleville, Ontario on the holiest day of the Jewish calendar. As Canada navigates this global rupture, our response is grounded in our highest principles. Canada is an open, pluralistic society with a public square full of robust and civil debate. Our success is underpinned by this civility, by our democratic institutions, and by respect for our differences. As Prime Minister Carney recently observed, we are a steady partner when predictability is at a premium. Canada's candidacy for the Human Rights Council for 2028 to 2030 bears witness to our values and to the nations represented here we would be honoured to be able to count on your support. The rule of law is one of the pillars of our society in Canada and it guides our action abroad. Canada's commitment to human rights and international law is strong. This includes our support for those institutions that defend these principles such as the International Criminal Court. Canada remains unequivocally committed to the Charter of the United Nations, which Canada helped to shape. Article 1, sub 2 of the UN Charter underlines a foundational principle of this institution, the self-determination of peoples. And let us be clear, self-determination is a right to which both Israelis and Palestinians are entitled. Canada firmly believes that lasting peace and security can be achieved only through a negotiated two-state solution. That means a Palestinian state living alongside Israel in peace, security and dignity. Israel's right to exist is not up for debate, and the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination in a state of their own is also not up for debate. The two-state solution remains the guiding principle of our Middle East policy, and our actions are calibrated to support this outcome. Alongside our partners, we will continue to target those who lead, arm and finance Hamas and other terrorist organizations who threaten the security of Israel and the broader region. Hamas must play no role in the governance of Palestine. Israel's settlements in the West Bank are illegal under international law and an obstacle That is why Canada announced earlier this month that we intend to restrict trade in goods with illegal Israeli settlements. We will also continue to provide vital humanitarian assistance to civilians in need. in order to respond to the urgent humanitarian crisis in Sudan, we recently announced financing to the tune of $120 million to help the affected people. From Lebanon to Haiti to Gaza and elsewhere, we are supporting efforts to reduce poverty, to strengthen resilience, to promote gender equality, to defend the rights of LGBTQ2I persons and create economic opportunities. The United Nations system plays an essential role in this regard. But the UN is not and must not be a static organisation. While the UN is experiencing major changes, we should ensure that it is ready for the future. We would like to thank Mr. Antonio Guterres for his efforts over the past decade. We are very much looking forward to cooperating with the new Secretary General, be that a man or a woman. Mr. President, distinguished colleagues. It looks very different today than it did when I was growing up in rural Nova Scotia. The tide has turned. We could spend our time wishing that it had not. But to indulge in nostalgia or to give in to despair would be to let our people down. That's not an option. Instead, Canada chooses to move with confidence and strength. Though some would build higher walls and retreat from international engagement, we believe that long-term partnerships are the way to prosperity and security. Though some are turning away from the principles of the United Nations, nations, we remain committed to them. And though some would rather ignore the rupture that we see before our very eyes, we are willing to see the world as it is. Rather than yearn for days gone by, let us together take this opportunity to do right by our people and build together. This is the path that Canada will take, and we invite you to join us in partnership. Thank you. Merci, miglèche. I thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada.
