The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Jose Antonio Cast, President of the Republic of Chile. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. A very, very good afternoon to you all. Secretary General, President of the General Assembly, Heads of State and Government, distinguished delegates. Particular greetings to the delegation that has travelled with me from Chile. I wish to greet our Minister for Foreign Affairs, our Minister for the Environment, for Development and the Family, our Ambassadors, our Senators, and members of Parliament. And I wish to greet each and every Chilean person. Greetings and a warm embrace to you all. 64 years ago in this same forum, the then President of Chile, Jorge Alessandri, described our country, Chile, as a large, narrow nation between the Andes and the Pacific, extending from there till the moving expanse of the Antarctic. the land remains where it is what has changed is the world around it what has changed first and foremost is Chile for the vast swathes of the 90s and until the beginning of the 2000s Chile was a success story and a model for many regions and nations our country implemented economic policies that prioritized economic stability openness to trade and private investment in the Latin American context in which many nations were facing inflation crises and external debt. Chile distinguished itself because it continued to show fiscal responsibility, display high rates of growth and poverty reduction. What happened then? Chile ground to a halt. Things stagnated. It took bad decisions. Public policies were implemented that increased taxation, regulation and obstacles to entrepreneurship. We also weathered a very difficult juncture in October 2019. Chile then fell to its knees in our streets. For months there was an outbreak of violence. Chaos reigned and disorder prevailed. All of that brought consequences with it. investment plummeted, employment ground to a stencil and homicide levels rose to an extent that Chile had never seen in modern history as a result of the rising tide of organized crime and that all happened until very recently, until now. Distinguished, I've come to this forum to tell you that Chile is back and that is no slogan, it is the very reality of a country that today begins to stride towards development. Our government rather took office with one conviction. Order does not run counter to freedom. Order is one of the preconditions of freedom. The freedom to walk home worry-free and to not be a victim of crime. The freedom to run a business and not be stymied by the action of the state. The freedom to invest and not find yourselves in a situation where the rules of the game are continually changing. We have been in government for six years and we're getting our house in order. Today, Chile is a safer, more competitive country and a nation with far less red tape. Chile is a safer country. In Chile, in the first six months of this year, the rate of homicides decreased to the tune of 11.5% and we are now approaching pre-pandemic homicide levels. Our borders are under better control. We have our border shield plan, and that has made it possible to induce irregular entry by 86%. And we have deported 50% more people than we did last year. People do not come in through the window. They come in through their ports with all their documents in order in the same vein. We have the Santiago Accord, and here I thank our Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was the person who spearheaded that initiative. And this is a security initiative. Many South American nations have acceded to it so that we can coordinate to effectively combat transnational organised crime. Our work is not yet done. It has only just started. A safer country is a country with more trust. And where there is trust, there is more growth, employment and investment. We are also today a more competitive nation. Only a few weeks ago, Chile adopted the most significant economic reform of recent decades. We approved a reduction to business tax. It's now gone from 27% to 23%. This tax had only been on the increase since 1990. It had never decreased. we have also temporarily reduced housing purchase tax and we have launched an initiative for capital repatriation there's better tax stability too we now have less red tape we are also dismantling what we call this ideology of always having to issue permits this is, if you like, a sort of hidden bureaucracy which stops business projects from forging ahead. In the last six months, we've had requests to invest more than $44 billion in our economy, and these investment projects applications are being assessed by our environmental evaluation systems. More than $33 billion have been approved for projects that had been in the wings for years. We have unleashed $17 billion for environmental projects. We are taking tangible actions that are changing the very course of Chile and bringing us closer to development. The economy is not yet taking off and unemployment is still plunging thousands of families into anguish. But unemployment is hard and high, but it will change. change will come. Results are slow to materialise, but structural reforms are underway. We know where we're going, and we're not simply reacting without having any clear course in mind. After storms, the sun always comes out. After winter, spring always arrives, and after years of deadlock, Chile is back. There are many reasons that can explain how we got to where we are, but there's only one path that we need to follow for Chile to once again take off, spread its wings, and fly. That is the path of unity, unity between all of those that defend freedom and want to see Chile's people thrive. There are many things that might separate the right and the left in Chile, but we are united by our desires to see Chile grow once more and become a safer nation. Delegates, people from the investment world are listening to us, and I say to you, choose Chile to invest. You will find clear rules that do not change day to day. you will find courts that function, contracts that are abided by, and a state ready to facilitate investment. Chile understands that in a multipolar world, institutional stability is not a luxury, it is a need. For example, we are a pioneer in the energy transition. Chile possesses around a quarter of global lithium reserves and we are the largest productor of copper on the planet. Chile has a lot of sunlight, the heat of the sun, a long pacific coast, lakes, rivers, volcanoes that can create vast stores of energy. Chile also has the Strait of Magallan, a crucial alternative route for global trade. Our nation will become the bridge and the port for the bio-oceanic corridors that will unite America with Asia. This richness, this wealth is not only fortune that we have in our coffers. It brings with it responsibility to you. Chile will never renounce its sovereignty. neither will it cease to exploit its own minerals at the same time we have we have our sovereignty of course but at the same time we say that the energy of the future must serve humankind and energy must not be held hostage by monopolies or actors that do not abide by the rules please make no mistake here it is possible to reconcile growth and sustainability the two are inseparable. Chile understands that environmental protection and economic progress form part of one single development strategy, one in which investment and innovation are linchpins when it comes to improving the quality of life of our people. Sustainable development requires robust institutions, clear rules, timely decisions and effective administration, able to turn commitments and diagnoses into tangible results for both people and the environment. President, I now wish to turn to a discussion of our continent, Latin America, because I sincerely believe that the coming decade can be ours. For the first time in a long time, Latin American governments are really, truly uniting and working together, not by simply issuing communiques, but getting to know each other and speaking to each other to really come up with common plans against transnational organized crime, migration control, and coming together to forge joint development opportunities. Latin America is the continent of the future, and those of us that lead the continent today are ready to give momentum to that change. Relations with our neighbors, Peru, Bolivia, and Argentina are in fine fettle. We are resuming relations with Venezuela. Under a new leadership, we've opened doors that were closed for years. Some people will say to us that we don't, or they don't, understand this change, but others, or that they don't understand this move on our part. Others will say that we're simply new, unthinking allies of this country, but we're neither one or the other. We recognise the reality for what it is. We value change where it exists and we offer support. We're of the view that Venezuela has before it, a historic opportunity to reconcile with its best democratic traditions, with its institutions and with the millions of its children that are now scattered across our continent that want to return. This path will be a demanding one. Chile is ready and willing to provide the help necessary. After two decades of tensions, Latin America wants this history to have a happy conclusion. Delegates, this assembly cannot remain indifferent to the wars and conflicts that are raging around the world. These open conflicts do not only threaten the stability of many regions, rather they damage the entire world. Chile, like many countries represented in this chamber, imports almost all of the oil it consumes and has been directly affected by manifold wars. I'm not talking here about abstract geopolitics. The impact is expressed in the cost of bread, transport and harvest. Inflation that refuses to hold still, taxes that do not decrease, investment delayed and jobs that don't arrive. entire countries that were really taking off and triumphing have once again ground to a halt and seen stagnation settling for wars that they didn't start and that they can't stop. For therefore, our appeal to you is direct. Wars must stop. Wars do not only drain the blood of those that fight them. They plunge people into poverty. Indeed, they do that for the whole world. We all lose with wars and we've lost too much. The United Nations has a role to play and it must do so with the character and the dynamism that it has not yet shown. Delegates, here is the most uncomfortable thing I came to say, the hardest pill to swallow in my speech. This organization has not been commensurate with the challenges of our times. It's not only a leadership problem, one of the present or the future, but rather a problem in terms of action. For decades and for several reasons, the United Nations has not been part of the solution to the problems I've outlined. We cannot simply continue to play by the same rules of an order that was established in 1945 in 2026. What we've seen is the development of a UN architecture that holds too many discussions and is too quick to act. A security council that reflects the political arena of 1945 and not the reality of 2026. We have red tape that continues to proliferate, as is true for indeed many countries. countries. We're seeing agendas that, however noble they might appear, have ultimately postponed what this organization committed to do with its founding charter, that is, maintain peace, protect life, and defend the freedom of its peoples. We believe in the United Nations, and believing in the United Nations means ensuring that the organization discharges its mandate. I propose three things, reducing bureaucracy and focusing our resources where there are lives at stake. We must suspend agendas that are not priorities to return the spotlight to those that really are priorities. We must reform the Security Council, not as a symbolic gesture, but as a vital prerequisite to ensure that the Council's decisions are once again respected and upheld. Chile signed the San Francisco Charter and has been present, ready and willing to defend all its causes, all of its causes rather. We are committed to the high seas agreement known as the BBNJ and we proposed Valparaíso as the headquarters of its executive secretariat. That means that we now have the first UN body to ever have had a headquarters in Latin America and this is an agreement which brings together many different sectors in Chile to play this role. This housing of these headquarters is an expression of the multilateralism that we believe in, a tangible, ambitious and able to prove to yield results. There needs to be a multilateralism that is effective and efficient. And allow me to say that the reforms I talked about cannot wait. While we discuss how to modernize institutions created in 1945, we're seeing the emergence of the most powerful technology that humankind has ever known, and no one's governing it. Artificial intelligence is not only a technical matter that we can delegate to experts, it is an ethical challenge and it's a geopolitical issue. We reject the false dilemma between innovation and responsibility. We don't believe that going quicker is always better, and neither are we going to turn our back on opportunities as a result of fear. For our country, AI can amount to and mean growth of between 10% and 20%. As such, we are choosing the path that we call one of responsible pace. That means making progress as quickly as our ability to administer progress allows. We have regulations that make things possible that do not hamper progress. We have investment in talent and in energy, and we have rigorous assessments of everything that's happening. We want to lead from a position of knowledge and not fear. And I say this in this room for one reason. The United Nations must be able to bring humankind together to discuss a technology that will decide the fate of this century. Nothing can simply be resolved by an algorithm. Mr. President, allow me to go back to the beginning. The president that I talked about that spoke here 74 years ago spoke on behalf of his people and discarded ideological differences. He said that Chile will continue working fervently and with deep belief in the principles of the UN Charter and the fact that they must be tangibly expressed. We believe in human rights. And at that time in 1945, we had 7 million inhabitants. Today we have 20 million. The world has changed and we have too. But what he said remains relevant. And once again, I say before you that Chile has come back to establish order. With order, freedom returns, trust returns, and it has done. Investment has returned and investment brings work. Chile as getting back on its feet as quickly as it fell. And it's come to say to the world that a country can recover. And a country recovers with votes, agreements, laws and results. But I have one more thing to say. That is that a future can be built without being held hostage by others' decisions. Latin America can be the continent of the coming decade. Not because someone gives it permission to be just that. but because we have the desire and the ability to be that country and that continent. We want to lead the path to that goal. Chile is back. Thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Chile.
