The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Han Zheng, the Vice President of the People's Republic of China. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Thank you. Mr. President, colleagues, the world is witnessing intertwined changes and turbulence, protracted geopolitical conflicts, widening development gaps. and a growing number of global challenges. Five years ago, at a 76th session of the UN General Assembly, President Xi Jinping put forward the Global Development Initiative. Since then, he has proposed the Global Security Initiative, the Global Civilization Initiative, and the Global Governance Initiative. These initiatives provide strategic guidance for the building of a community with a shared future for humanity. At a time when countries of the world find their future so closely linked, more and more of them want to join hands to shoulder the historic mission of addressing difficulties and challenges and advancing the well-being of all humanity. With this in mind, I propose that we take the following four steps. First, we should safeguard the post-war international order and foster lasting peace based on common security. The world wants peace, not war. The international system centered on the UN and the international order underpinned by international law that emerged after World War II must be upheld. We should turn into action the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and reject the Cold War mindset and block confrontation. We should settle differences and disputes through dialogue and consultation, and oppose unilateral military actions that violate the UN Charter and circumvent Security Council authorization. Major countries show their special responsibilities for safeguarding international peace and security, and they should take the lead in complying with the rules, upholding rule of law and doing what's right. China holds that the sovereignty and security of countries in the Middle East, including the Gulf, should be respected. International industrial and supply chains should be kept stable and unimpeded and global trade should be safeguarded. China calls for advancing the governance of the West Bank and the post-conflict reconstruction of Gaza in accordance with the principle of the Palestinians governing Palestine. It also calls for bringing the Palestinian question back onto the right track of this two-state solution at an early date. On Ukraine, President Xi Jinping has put forward four points on what must be done, which are the fundamental guidance for China in playing a continued constructive role in its own way for achieving a political settlement of the crisis. China urges the relevant country to immediately stop using threat of force against Cuba and immediately and completely lift the blockade and sanctions against Cuba. Second, we should address the global development predicament. and promote prosperity for all through openness and cooperation. We should keep development at the center of the international agenda and jointly forge a global development partnership based on unity and equality, and that is balanced and inclusive. It is important to give priority to key areas, including poverty reduction, food security and energy transition, step up resource input and increase support for countries in the global south. Developed countries should honour their commitment to development financing and climate financing. The international community should also build consensus and pull strength to formulate the post-2030 global development agenda. Facing a new scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation especially the dynamic development of artificial intelligence we should take a people-centered approach and develop AI for the positive and for good narrow the digital divide and promote development that is universally beneficial Both history and reality prove that countries can hardly achieve development without an open and cooperative international environment. Protectionism produces no winners. Building walls, erecting barriers, decoupling and cutting off supply chains disrupt global industrial and supply chains and harm the interests of all parties. We must firmly safeguard the WTO-centred, rules-based multilateral trading system build an open world economy jointly foster and strengthen new growth drivers and see that economic globalization is inclusive and delivers benefits to all. Third, we should advance exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations and rebuild unity and mutual trust through communication and dialogue. Diversity has created splendor in the world Condescension and the self-centered mindset Have no place in the interactions among different cultures Promoting mutual trust, mutual respect, solidarity And harmonious coexistence is the right approach to take We need to use the UN platform To boost international people-to-people exchanges And take the celebration of the International Day for dialogue among civilizations as an occasion to promote mutual understanding and amity among all peoples and the common development of diverse civilizations. We should reject ideological prejudice and respect the development path and social systems decided on independently by the people of all countries. We should deepen the sharing of governance practices and jointly explore ways to tackle challenges facing our times. Fourth, we should stay committed to multilateralism and take steps to safeguard fairness and justice. Multilateralism is a choice made by humanity after going through scourges. And fairness and justice are the joint pursuit of the people of all countries. China holds that all countries, big or small, are equal members of the international community and that world affairs should be handled by all through consultation and rule of law, fairness and justice in international affairs should be jointly upheld Countries should join forces and act together to safeguard the UN and make it stronger China supports the UN in reforming and improving itself It should advance the UNAT initiative and enhance the performance of its bodies rather than merely cut its budgets and mandates It should effectively address global challenges including climate change and public health security improve and increase the representation and voice of the Global South. China pays high tribute to Secretary General Antonio Guterres, who will complete his term soon. China supports the election in accordance with the UN Charter of a new Secretary General who honors the UN Charter, has exceptional capability, upholds integrity and fairness and demonstrates courage and dedication. Mr. President, colleagues, on October 25, 1971, right here in this August Hall, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 2758 at its 26th session with an overwhelming majority by which Anga decided to restore all the rights of the People's Republic of China in the UN and recognized the representatives of the government of the People's Republic of China as the only legitimate representatives of China to the UN. This is of profound and far-reaching significance for both China and the world. Over the past 55 years, China has been a stabilizing force in times of volatility. China is firmly committed to pursuing peaceful development and has the best track record on peace and security among major countries. It is the largest contributor to peacekeepers among the permanent members of the UN Security Council. It also took the initiative that led to the issuance of the first joint statement of the leaders of the five nuclear weapon states on preventing nuclear war. China has been a main engine driving common development. China has created two miracles at home, namely fast economic growth and long-term social stability. And over many years, it has contributed around 30% to global growth. China has joined hands with more than three-fourths of the countries in the world in pursuing high-quality Belt and Road cooperation. It has mobilized over 23 billion U.S. dollars and carried out more than 2,000 projects under the Global Development Initiative and it has granted zero-tariff status to all the African countries and LDCs having diplomatic relations with it to empower the Global South in pursuing modernization. China has been a progressive force in an era of change. China has always spoken up for the Global South stood up for the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries and continued to work toward a more just and equitable global governance system In October, China will host the Global Governance Forum in the Xiong'an New Area You are welcome to attend the forum and join in the discussion about the way forward in global governance. Mr. President, colleagues, No matter how the international dynamics evolve, China remains unchanged in its pursuit of peace and development, in its dedication to safeguarding fairness and justice, and in its commitment to multilateralism. China will join hands with all other countries to build a community with a shared future for humanity and make the world a better place for all of us. Thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Vice President of the People's Republic of China.
