The Assembly will be addressed by His Excellency, Jose Emanuel Ristripo, Vice President of the Republic of Colombia. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. The half is again The four year old Mr. Secretary General, Mr. Vice President of the General Assembly, heads of state and government, excellencies, ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen, I appear today before this Assembly representing the President of the Republic of Colombia, Abelardo de la Esprilla, who has asked me to be here on his behalf and bring before you a message written by him. From this moment on, what you will hear are the words of the President of the Republic of Colombia. Le he pedido. I have asked the Vice President of the Republic, José Manuel Restrepo, to read this message on my behalf. I have done so because I assured the Colombian people that I would not leave the country during the four years of my term, and I am keeping that promise. 47 days ago, a new government took office in Colombia. Three days later, at 7.34 a.m., the earth shook. A 7.4 magnitude earthquake struck my country. In a matter of seconds, homes, hospitals, schools, roads and bridges had been totally destroyed or severely damaged. The Colombian Geological Service confirmed that this was the strongest magnitude earthquake recorded in Colombia so far this century. Hundreds of Colombians lost their lives. 4,500 were injured and more than 452,000 people were affected. 36,000 homes were totally destroyed they represented the life savings assets of these people the government that had barely started its work was forced to confront one of the greatest natural resources in our recent history there was no time to ask whether we were ready we had to act and we did so From the very outset, I gave one unequivocal instruction. We had to save human lives. There was time for everything else. Appointments to posts could wait. Meetings could wait. But my fellow Colombians, trapped underneath the rubble, could not. The government deployed to the affected areas alongside the security forces, emergency services, volunteers and rescue workers. And from the very beginning, we started receiving the generous assistance from friendly countries and international organizations, such as all of you. And today, from this rostrum, I wish to express the profound and sincere gratitude of the Colombian people to all of you. The earthquake claimed the lives of many of our fellow Colombians and destroyed thousands of homes and buildings and much infrastructure, but it also reminded us once again of something that Colombians are very familiar with. We might fall, we might suffer, we might weep, but what we cannot and what we do not know how to do is give up. But I'm not only going to talk to you about this tragedy. I want to refer to what Colombia decided to do in its aftermath. On the 7th of August, I took over a country that had begun to lose something far more difficult to rebuild than a road or a building. That is, trust. Trust in the law that should protect our citizens. Trust that working, studying and doing things well are worthwhile. Trust in a state that lives up to its duty. No country, no country can prosper when its people cease to trust in it. And that's why the government that I lead has tasked itself with taking up every possible decision to enable Colombia to believe in itself again and to ensure that the world can believe in Colombia again. And I call that overarching purpose the Patria Milagro, the miracle nation. The first step is a basic one, restoring security. For far too long, Colombians have had to live alongside situations that no society should accept as normal. A rural farmer having to ask permission from a terrorist group to work on his land. A shopkeeper having to hand over part of the fruits of his labor to extortionists. a mother increasingly gripped by fear every time their child goes out to play in the park. That is not and it cannot become the norm. Consequently, from the very beginning of my government, I gave the security forces one clear instruction to regain territorial control, to fully restore the state's authority and to confront the structures using terrorism. My government is determined to do away with euphemisms. Organisations that murder, that kidnap, that use explosives, that recruit children and that deliberately resort to terror to subjugate a society are terrorist groups. that is what we call them and we are facing up to them with the full legitimate force of the state within the constitution and within the law but there is another reality that is very often overlooked the illicit drugs produced in Colombia don't end up in Colombia drugs trafficking is a transnational criminal enterprise its roots cross borders, its money moves through international financial systems and its networks operate across numerous countries. I will do everything necessary to combat that scourge. But a transnational threat requires the international community to play its part as well. Security, while essential, is not enough. a territory that provides no opportunities remains vulnerable. My administration is therefore also focused on ensuring that Colombia grows again. For years, we have discussed how to better distribute what we have. That is a legitimate, necessary discussion. But it's absolutely not enough. we also need to ask ourselves, how are we going to produce more? In the end, governments can't decree economic growth. What they have to do is lay the foundations for it to occur. In our miracle nation, we want an idea to be able to become a business, a business to create jobs and for jobs to become well-being for our people. To those of you anywhere else in the world who are wondering where to invest, I would like to invite you to look at Colombia. It's a country with access to two oceans, productive land, energy resources, enormous biodiversity, an excellent geographical position, and a government that champions private enterprise. But above all, look at our people. Colombia does not want to watch the technological transformation of our time from the sidelines. We want to be a part of it. We want to train young people for super intelligence, for robotics, for data science, for agro industry, for engineering and for the new economy. economy. Millions of Colombians are not asking the state to sort out their lives. They're asking the state to give them the opportunity to build those lives. And that is what gives a meaning to what I have called the miracle nation. This isn't the name of a government, nor is it a naive promise that our problems will just disappear. No, that's not it. This is the country that we're going to build. It's a country where security allows us to reclaim our territories threatened by terrorism, where trust attracts investment, where investment creates jobs, and where growth leads to better living conditions. It is a schoolteacher in Mompos Bolívar teaching with the tools of the 21st century. It is a rural farmer in Ubaté, Cundinamarca, who can now sow, sell and prosper thanks to his work. It's a young woman in Pasto, Nariño, preparing to be a part of the future industries. This is the miracle nation that we've already started to build. I'm well aware that 47 days is far too little time to change a country but it is enough time to change the course of a country and I want Colombia to once again enjoy strong growth that growth should lead to a job for a young person a home for a family timely access to medicines a harvest that finds a market and Colombians who, thanks to their own efforts and dedication, can escape poverty. This is our miracle economy, an economy that grows so that people can grow with it. Our relationship with the world is also a part of this purpose. Over the last few weeks, we have seen this very tangibly when friendly countries and international organizations came to our aid following the earthquake. This solidarity makes full sense when it reaches people, when it solves problems and when it produces results. and it is precisely because I recognize the value of that corporation that today I want to speak frankly about the UN. I've been critical of this organization. I was critical of it before I became president and it would be inconsistent to address this assembly today and attempt to conceal my convictions. This criticism isn't born out of whim or hostility towards the United Nations It's based in political, institutional, doctrinal considerations. I believe in the UN as an organization, and it is precisely for that reason that I believe it's legitimate to ask whether the institutions that we've been building are effectively responding to the problems that it was created to address. The Charter itself is very clear here. This organization was born to maintain international peace and security, to foster friendly relations among nations, and to promote cooperation in resolving the major common problems. eight decades on the question cannot be whether those purposes remain valid of course they do the questions have completely changed though is the UN fulfilling those purposes with the effectiveness demanded by today's world are there bureaucratic structures that have become excessively cumbersome? Are we dedicating too many resources, too much energy to administering procedures and or too little to resolving problems? Are we measuring our results rigorously enough? Another matter that I wish to address is human rights. Colombia defends human rights and will continue to do so. but my country believes that protecting human rights loses credibility when it becomes subjected to political calculation. I categorically reject human rights being used as a banner raised against some and lowered against others nor can human rights become an instrument rewarding friends punishing adversaries, or worse still, remaining silent in line with the political circumstances of the time. Our duty is to prevent politics from weakening the defence of human rights. If we want the system to be respected, it needs to be serious, consistent, and equally demanding on all of us. My country is consistent, and therefore we want to ensure that we have a credible defense of human rights. And in this, just as in so many other areas, the United Nations still has some room for improvement. In that connection, we trust in a democratic transition in Venezuela, a swift, safe, far-reaching transition. there's another doctrinal concern that i wish to raise just as honestly globalism allow me to begin by clarifying what i mean by that i'm not talking about international trade or cooperation among states nor am i talking about a humanity that shares common problems and responsibilities all of those things are absolutely necessary i'm talking about a concept according to which nation, sovereignty, distinct identities, traditions and the values of peoples are obstacles that gradually give way to increasing political and cultural uniformity decided by supranational bodies. I don't share in that doctrine which I consider perverse and harmful. For me, multinaturalism isn't about dissolving nations but rather about facilitating cooperation among them. loving one's homeland isn't compatible with respecting others defending history culture values and traditions doesn't mean disparaging those of another international cooperation is richer when those who sit around this table know who they are where they come from and what the people in whose name they speak represent. Several of the questions that I've asked are not unfamiliar to this organization. The UNAT initiative has placed on the table issues of duplication, fragmentation, administrative burden, and the way mandates function as part of an effort to make the United Nations more efficient and more effective. President, Secretary General, Heads of State and Government Excellencies, acknowledging an institution's imperfections doesn't mean overlooking its value. On the contrary, it might be a way of strengthening it. It has never been my style to hide behind political correctness or to tell my interlocutors what I imagine they want to hear. I'm not looking to please anyone, but rather to set out the position of the Republic of Colombia respectfully, cordially, and clearly. No human institution is perfect. All can be improved, perfected, and the United Nations is no exception. There is one specific area that Colombia wishes to reflect on further, that is the international fight against terrorism. This organization has done significant work here. Since 1963, the international community has developed 19 universal legal instruments aimed at preventing different terrorist acts. However, after decades of discussion, there is still no legal definition of terrorism that is universally agreed by member states. The UN Office of Counterterrorism itself has recently flagged that the lack of a universally agreed definition begets legal uncertainty, discrepancies among national laws and causes difficulties in international cooperation. The Republic of Colombia believes that the time has come to move ahead. we need a common international definition that is sufficiently clear and precise compatible with international law and fundamental safeguards but also useful enough so that states can cooperate effectively in combating acts of terrorism a serious definition should avoid two extremes on the one hand a political disagreement being arbitrarily characterized as terrorism and on the other hand allowing an organization to hide murders, kidnappings, bombings or deliberate attacks against civilians behind a political label in order to evade the legal consequences of its actions. Terrorism must be condemned regardless of the perpetrator, where it is committed or the cause they invoke. The United Nations has repeatedly reaffirmed that terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations represents one of the most serious threats to international peace and security. Now, a better definition is not enough. States need better tools to combat this phenomenon. We need faster mechanisms for for exchanging information and intelligence. We need better judicial cooperation, effective tracing, freezing, seizing instruments for assets related to terrorist financing, and we need closer cooperation to deal with networks that operate simultaneously across different countries. Colombia stands ready to participate actively in that discussion. My country wants to see United Nations where the effectiveness is measured less by the volume of documents it produces and far more by the results that it delivers. A UN that is less inclined to multiply processes and more determined to translate international cooperation into concrete action. That is the sort of multilateralism that Colombia is ready to defend, one that respects the sovereign equality of states, as the Charter itself provides, but one that is also capable of acting effectively when threats recognize no borders. Drugs trafficking, terrorism, transnational organized crime and illicit economies are precisely those threats. Specifically, my government's foreign policy is guided by national interest, by the defence of our sovereignty and by the pursuit of results. That national interest I referred to also has a specific objective, that is, ensuring the prosperity of our people. Foreign policy should serve to create jobs, to attract investment and technology, to open markets and to create opportunities for Colombians. with that goal in mind I wish to extend an invitation to the world come to Colombia invest in Colombia grow and prosper with Colombia believe in Colombia I don't promise you a perfect country but I can assure you that I am working tirelessly to build you a nation that is to build a nation that is safer, more prosperous and with more opportunities for its people. Colombia does not come before the world today to ask others to do for us what it is our responsibility to do for ourselves. Rebuilding our country, restoring security, growing the economy, protecting our institutions and giving opportunities back to millions of people are first and foremost responsibilities that fall to Colombians. But we also know that no nation can turn its back on the world. We need partners and friends with whom we can trade, invest, exchange knowledge and address common threats. That is the Colombia that I present to you today. A country that is well aware of its difficulties, but also of its enormous potential. a country that doesn't try to hide its problems but rather to confront them, a country that is getting back on its feet and knows where it wants to go. To the nations represented here, I extend my hand respectfully and through friendship. Colombia wants to work with you on everything that we can build together. I want, within a few years when the world looks again at my country I want them to see a nation that is safer more prosperous more well respected and above all far more confident in its own abilities and if that is the Columbia that the world sees There will be no need to explain what I meant when I spoke of the Patria Milagro, the Miracle Nation. Thank you very much. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Vice President of the Republic of Colombia. The Assembly will hear an address by his ex-
