I now give the floor to Her Excellency Kristina Markus-Lassen, Chair of Delegation of Denmark. Madam President, Excellencies, distinguished delegates. A compass does not change with the weather. It helps you find a way in fair weather as well as in storm. Eighty-one years ago, the world gave itself a compass. We named it the United Nations Charter. It has helped us stay the course even when the seas have been anything but calm. It has pointed us toward a world of equal rights, self-determination of peoples, and territorial integrity of all states, large and small. towards a rules-based international order. The progress has been real. More than a billion people lifted out of poverty. Standards of living transformed. Colonial empires brought to an end. Independent nations emerged. Peoples gained the right to shape their own future. That progress was made possible because we kept consulting the compass, because we stayed the course. Today, it seems we are losing our way. Wars and conflicts are at the highest level since World War II. Extreme poverty is under rise. Extreme weather and climate-related disasters are hitting record highs. Mistrust, polarization, and divisions are growing, both among states and within societies. Even the most basic principles of international law, including international humanitarian law, are violated with impunity. To get back on track, we must turn our attention to the compass. Excellencies, respect for the Charter for Human Rights for International Law is not a courtesy we extend when convenient. These are binding obligations we all agree to. Respecting them is the precondition for international peace and security. We see this clearly in Ukraine. Russia's illegal war of choice could end tomorrow if Russia withdrew to its own territory and stopped trying to redraw borders by force. The vast majority of UN member states and the UN Secretary General support calls for an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in Ukraine. It is the only basis for good faith talks aimed at a just and lasting peace in line with international law, including the UN Charter. Ukraine has been offering this for a year now. Denmark's support to Ukraine will remain steadfast. This is not only a matter of helping Ukraine defend itself. It is a matter of defending the universal principles upon which this organization was built. Excellencies, in Sudan the war continues to inflict immense human suffering. Millions are displaced. Famine has been confirmed. And the international community has been warned of mass atrocities over and over again, but has failed to act. The responsibility for this horrific war lies in the hand of the warring parties, yet it is fueled by outside actors and permitted by international inaction. We must act now to prevent further mass atrocities against the Sudanese people. We must put our political will and weight behind a stronger demand for peace and accountability. The warring parties must come to the negotiation table, engage in dialogue, and agree to a much-needed truce. Denmark fully supports the Quintus efforts to advance a civilian-led political process and welcomes the improved coordination among mediators. Excellencies, in Syria, the fall of the brutal Assad regime offers a historic opportunity to build a brighter future for all Syrians. Denmark is committed to supporting the people of Syria in a Syrian-led and owned transition. It is a glimpse of hope in a troubled region, and a stark contrast to the destabilizing actions of Iran, whose consequences are felt far beyond the region. Denmark's position remains clear. Iran must never be allowed to develop or acquire a nuclear weapon. We strongly support continued diplomatic efforts to restore effective international verification of Iran's nuclear program. And we deeply regret the unwillingness of a few Council members to acknowledge that sanctions measures have been reinstated in full accordance with Security Council Resolution 2231. At the same time, we urge Iran to comply fully with Resolution 2817, cease attacks against countries in the region, and refrain from any actions or threats that undermine the freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz. Excellencies, last year this assembly endorsed the New York Declaration, a roadmap toward the two-state solution, a path to lasting peace and security for Israelis and Palestinians. Since then, the comprehensive plan to end the Gaza conflict has been endorsed by the Security Council. Now it must be implemented in full. We call on all parties to stay committed to the plan. in Gaza, civilians continue to pay the price. Far more must be done to secure humanitarian access and long-term peace. And it preoccupied West Bank, settler violence, and settlement expansion, threatened the daily lives of Palestinians, and undermined the prospects for a future Palestinian state. This has to stop. Excellencies, as an elected member of the Security Council, Denmark strives to ensure that the Council fulfills its mandate. At times, we succeed. This June, the Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 2823 on accountability for crimes against UN peacekeepers, led by Denmark and Pakistan, and backed by a record 153 member states, a clear signal of commitment to the safety and security of the brave men and women who serve under the UN flag. and a clear demonstration that the Council can still come together and speak with one voice. Too often, however, the Security Council is blocked by geopolitical divisions, unable to act. Meanwhile, the costs of inaction are felt by the civilians across the world as the disrespect for international humanitarian law is allowed to fester. Excellencies, our collective inability to halt the killings, suffering and injustices in Gaza, Ukraine, Sudan and beyond must not prompt us to surrender to a world ruled by brute force. On the contrary, it must inspire us to work harder to sustain and strengthen the structures, instruments and mechanism we have built over the last 81 years. To Denmark, this includes maintaining our firm support for the ICJ and the ICC as core international justice institutions. This year, Denmark nominated its first ever candidate for judge at the ICC, reaffirming our unwavering support for the court at a critical time. It also means continuing to meet the UN target of providing 0.7% of GNI for official development assistance. For more than 45 years, Denmark has consistently delivered on that goal. We do so not as an act of altruism, but because it's in our shared interest. It creates jobs, opportunities, and hope where people live, allowing them to build a future at home, increasing stability, and mutual prosperity. We call on fellow member states to join us. At the current juncture, however, sustaining an order with the UN as its core means working for reform. Reform is how we keep this organization fit for the world we live in. Denmark continues to call for a fundamental Security Council reform. We wish to expand the Council with more members in both categories, including permanent seat for underrepresented regions. and we wish to commence tax-based negotiations. Only then can we begin to redress historical injustices. Denmark also strongly supports the UN-80 reform process. We applaud the results so far and call for ambitions to be raised. We must strive to build a more efficient and inclusive UN, a UN that delivers better on its core mandates and underground where it matters most. To enable this, we call on all UN member states to meet their financial obligations to the UN in full and on time. Excellencies, let's be real. We need the UN. Not for the sake of the UN, but in order to address challenges that face us all. Because no single country can manage climate change, global health threats, or the governance of emergent technologies on its own. The climate crisis makes the point starkly. We see it in droughts and wildfires, in record-breaking heat, and in the growing pressure on food, water and energy accessibility and security. The challenge before us is no longer a lack of solutions. We have the solutions. We know what's required. Now we need to deliver. Therefore, COP31 must be a COP of implementation, turning ambition into action and real-world results, delivering up the objectives of the Paris Agreement and its 1.5-degree Celsius temperature goal. With only four years left to 2030, we must also be honest about where we stand on sustainable development goals, both in terms of achievements and challenges. Let's make the upcoming SDG Summit a turning point. 2030 must not be a missed deadline. Excellencies, this year we'll be selecting a new Secretary General. Denmark thanks Secretary General Guterres for a decade of dedicated service to this organization, often under exceptionally difficult circumstances. The next Secretary General will take over an organization under strain and under scrutiny. To bring UN safely into the future, we must select a person who can work to restore the global trust in the UN and among its member states. Excellencies, in closing, I'm happy to inform you that last week, in this very building, Denmark, Greenland and the United States signed an agreement on security which strengthened the defense of Greenland, the NATO area and the American continent. The agreement is good for Greenland, for Denmark, for the United States, for NATO and Europe and for international peace and security. Progress can still be made when we consult the compass. I thank you. I thank the Chair of Delegation of Denmark.
