The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Pedro Sánchez Pérez Castellón, President of the Government of Spain. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. President. Ladies and gentlemen, I come here to speak to you from this rostrum with but one goal, to defend what so many are trying to destroy. I have come to defend the principles and ambitions that inspired the creation of this organisation 81 years ago. Principles and ambitions that different governments present here disregard or seek to dismantle. Eight years have gone by since I addressed this assembly for the first time and since then several things have changed in the world and I regret to say that things haven't changed well not many things have changed for the better but for the worse In 2018 the 193 countries that make up this body had just adopted the 2030 agenda and the majority of the leaders present here proudly showed off the SDGs logo. And we didn't do this because it was fashionable, nor because we thought that it would be an easy journey. We did it because the majority of us believed in this common promise. Because we were convinced that peace, sustainability, equal opportunities were not ideological positions, but rather a comprehensive part of the future of humanity. Today, however, these ideas are not only being called into question, they are being attacked by political actors and governments that want to take us back to a dark past. And I don't need to point them out, we all know who they are and what their modus operandi is. They start by questioning the rules, then they break them, knowing full well that nobody will dare to hold them accountable. They cut their contributions to multilateral bodies like this one. They point to their leaders and officials. They obstruct these organisations' ability to act to then write them off as useless entities that we can do without. What they're doing, nevertheless, is a planned and coordinated demolition attempt that is presented as something that we can't stop and that's necessary. However, the reality is that it runs counter to the structural currents of history and is based on three misguided pillars. The first of these pillars is selfishness, the absurd belief that the world is a zero-sum gain, where some winning must imply that others losing. The second pillar is ignorance, disregarding scientific evidence and assuming that there are countries that are so powerful that they can abuse all of the others and they don't need anyone else to prosper. And the third pillar, the worst in my opinion, is cruelty. Cruelty that isn't even moved when it sees the ribs of a starving child or a hospital reduced to rubble. over these eight years I've seen these selfish ignorant and cruel forces grow I've seen how they took off their masks and seized power in many places and then I saw them start illegal wars massacre innocent civilians I've seen them treat millions of human beings like livestock and take away aid from those suffering the most from poverty and disease. I've seen them pollute the atmosphere and also the ocean as if it's their own property and conspire to destroy this organisation and everything it represents. I'm saying this because bearing witness to these things has changed the way that I understand the world. However, it hasn't led me to lose hope because also over these eight years I've seen wonderful things that allow me to still have confidence in humanity. For example, I've seen millions of people mobilised to defend nature, peace and civil rights. I've seen thousands of activists and public servants confront these reactionary powers knowing full well that they're putting their professional careers and even their own lives at risk. I've seen scientists make progress that we thought was impossible And I've seen many governments do things right, opting for cooperation, social justice and environmental sustainability. All of this has taught me something that I want to share with all of you. And that is that humanity is not intrinsically good or bad. Humanity can actually be both. And every day, every year and in each and every crisis, we must decide how to act. the United Nations is one of the spaces where these decisions are made at the highest level and the UN doesn't always do it well of course I myself on several occasions have called out the contradictions and lackings of this body however with the same belief I must call out the fact that the majority of the voices that today insist on criticizing the United Nations are not describing its failure what they're doing is trying to cause its failure and I must also say that multilateralism is the best tool that humanity has to manage its diversity and its interdependence, especially in a globalised and multipolar world like the world we're living in today. And this is why what we need to do is ramp up our trust in this organisation. We must renew it and strengthen it so that this century it can play the same key role that it played played last century. And doing this will not be easy. However, the good news is that all of the guidance we need is right here in the United Nations Charter. In this charter, they wrote the best chapters. Our forefathers wrote it, the men and women who saw the world burn. And even then, they dared to imagine a better future. These men and women laid down their wisdom and their hope in this charter. And they didn't ask us to keep it in a glass case. They asked us to fulfil it. They asked us to defend it. And for us to turn back to it in times of uncertainty and extraordinary difficulty. And today is one of those times and therefore it's our duty to rise to the courage and the ambition present in this text in the United Nations Charter and this is why ladies and gentlemen we need to reform the Security Council so that all of the regions in the world have fair representation and so that we can do away with the right of veto of the permanent members because as the UN Charter sets out no country should be judged in its own case, no matter how powerful they are. We therefore need to strengthen all of the other main bodies and reorganise the agency's funds and programmes and provide them with more resources and more executive capacity so that they can have a more decisive impact on the great challenges that beset humanity. We must strengthen bodies like the International Criminal Court so that they can investigate, prosecute and punish those that break the rules. It took humanity centuries to replace might is right with the rule of law, and we must not be the generation that backtracks on this. It's for this very reason that we must rebuild the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament architecture, to avoid a poorly designed security policy, bring us back to another global conflict. And we must impose strict regulations on the tech oligarchs who control the functioning of social networks and the development of artificial intelligence. Because at the end of the day, the future of our children is more important than the pockets of these tech oligarchs. And of course, doing all of these things will require compromise, time, strong leadership, Being able to build agreements, to listen, to look beyond our known reality and imagine a better alternative. And what I'm advocating for for this leadership is very clear. Nine men have served as Secretary General of this organisation in its 80 years of existence. Now it's time for a woman to serve, a Latin American woman. because, ladies and gentlemen, how can an organisation that claims to speak on behalf of the whole of humanity never have had a woman leading the organisations? How can we represent all of the continents if for three decades we haven't let the third most populated continent have this role? The United Nations came to being with the promise that all human beings had their place in this house. Therefore, the time has come to fulfil the outstanding half. The time has come for a woman from Latin America to become United Nations Secretary General. This is an historic debt that we must settle. And today, more than ever, when feminism is being attacked, when thousands of women are falling victim to machism, violence and xenophobia. We must reaffirm this commitment. And I want it to be very clear. I'm not saying this because I think that women have anything to prove. I'm saying it because it is the world that needs to show itself that on the road to equality, there's no going back. In my country, ladies and gentlemen, in Spain, it was women who were the first to show us that security could not be achieved through force but through social progress it was brave women like Clara Campo Amor the first to defend in parliament the rejection of war as a way of interacting with the world and opting instead for empathy and peace that should always be what we do if only more of the leaders that came up to this rostrum this week had even half the courage and lucidity of Clara Campo Amor. Feminism, ladies and gentlemen, is one of the main forces of transformation and progress that the world has experienced in the last century and it's time for this force to guide this institution in much more of a clear and robust way and it's for these reasons, ladies and gentlemen, that I believe. I believe that in order to get off on the right footing in this new decisive step forward for the United Nations, the UN needs a female Latin American Secretary General. And I believe, what's more, that in order for her not to be alone, she will also need the support of brave governments who are prepared to do things right, however high the price to pay may be. This, ladies and gentlemen, is the option and the way forward that Spain has chosen. Over the last eight years, my country has opposed all wars of aggression wherever they have started, whether it's in Ukraine, in Lebanon or in Iran. We have refused to increase our military spending to 5% of GDP and we've done everything possible to avoid aggressions that run counter to the UN Charter, placing sanctions on the Russian aggressors, imposing an arms embargo on the Netanyahu government in Israel, and prohibiting the use of our territory to deploy an aggression that was against international law, and unequivocally condemning the genocide that Netanyahu is still perpetrating in Gaza. We have also mobilised resources to do more. And in the face of the chainsaws that have cut close to a third of world development aid in just two years, Spain has doubled its investment in cooperation and has increased its contribution to the multilateral system by 60%. And we've done this always holding true to our principles, not even in the most difficult times, like the times being experienced by the Spanish city of Ceuta, where inequality, desperation and disinformation has fed one of the most significant to regular migration crisis in recent years. I know that in times like this, the temptation is to take shortcuts, to give in to fear, to turn migrants into the enemy and to break the law. However, my country, Spain, will not do this. And a Spanish city like Ceuta won't do it either, because their citizens are showing that we can tackle a crisis without compromising on decency, upholding the law and respecting human rights. And we'll come out of this stronger precisely for this reason, because Spain does not choose the easy route. We always choose the fairest route. And I also want to recognise that the world knows this. At the end of the day, the reactionary forces that want to destroy this multilateral order won't stop attacking us for it. They want us to be intimidated. They want us to give up. They want us to end up believing that the SDGs are a lost cause, that defending the common good is naive, that cooperating is an act of weakness. Well, I'm here and I've come up to this rostrum to tell you loud and clear that they are wrong and that we will not keep quiet. The Spanish people are not going back. We will not stop believing that humanity can continue to progress and that working together, we can build a better world. And we're not going to do this because we believe that... delivering for our children, because we know that in a few years, future generations will look back. They will study this decisive decade and they will ask us what role each and every one of us played. They will ask us, what did we do when some countries started to break the rules and others decided to look the other way. They will ask us what we did when defending what we believed in started to cost us dearly. And when this happens, we want to be able to tell them that we did not give up the fight, not us. We want to be able to tell them that we gave everything to leave them a more peaceful, more sustainable, and of course, a fairer world. That's what we want to be able to tell them. And this is the commitment that I want to make here at this rostrum, not in my own name, of course, but rather on behalf of the country that I represent, Spain. Thank you very much. Thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Government of Spain. Thank you.
