The Assembly will hear the address of His Excellency Tayyar Alskesilasye Amde, President of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Thank you. that is the most important thing to do. I just don't like the big thing. I just like the many more. I like the only one. Excellency Kalirur Rahman, President of the 81st Session of the United General Assembly. I like the other one. President of the 81st session of the United General Assembly. Excellency. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen. On behalf of Ethiopia, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election as President of the 81st Session of the United Nations General Assembly. I also wish to express my since our appreciation to your predecessor, Her Excellency, Miss Annalina Barbok, for her leadership during our eighth-year session. Mr. President, we assemble at a historic moment for humanity. Sixty-three years ago, in 1963, Emperor Haile Selassie famously cautioned this global community. by stating lasting peace can be achieved only when nations recognize that their true strength lies not in the domination of others but in cooperation anchored upon a genuine equality. As a founding member of the United Nations, Ethiopia bears both the scars of historical betrayal and the unyielding conviction of a survivor. When the League of Nations abandoned our appeal against fascist aggression in the 1930s, we didn't surrender to despair and dissolution. We recently stood firm as champions of collective security, helping the birth of the very organization in which we stand for. Today, we call upon the community of nations to summon that same foundational courage to actively reinforce the very ideals that help prevent global conflict and the scourge of war. The question, therefore, is how much longer shall we wait before the pillars of collective security fractured beyond repair? This is exactly what drives the significance of multilateralism, not as a diplomatic convenience, but as a living shield rooted in sovereign equality to address the shifting tides of power politics. Mr. President, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for placing before us the defining imperatives of our era, namely artificial intelligence, the climate crisis, and deepening global inequalities. These are not only policy choices, they are the pivots upon which human destiny is determined. The United Nations has achieved remarkable victories against extreme poverty, but it has never been enough. While wealth accumulates in the hands of a few, billions endure the downside of structural deprivation. However, we believe that we are capable of charting the blueprint, the resources, and the wisdom to bridge this divide. What the global community lacks is not the means of implementation but the moral courage to keep the promise we made eight decades ago. Poverty and systemic inequality also fuel ecological and environmental crisis. Excessive consumption of the fuel drives the emission that is currently choking our planet. Yet, delayed promise adds a brutal toll on the loss of lives and the devastation of infrastructures. If we are to survive this crisis, we must act now and act fast. Speaking of actions, my country, Ethiopia, will proudly host COP32 in November 2027. Ethiopia will help organize a vibrant and inclusive platform for the private sector and international stakeholders to pioneer tangible solutions to climate action. In this connection, I sincerely invite all world leaders to come to Ethiopia and leave their footprints at this important global climate summit. With regard to the digital revolution and artificial intelligence, Africa is compelled to ask a very defining question. Will the age of the AI become another instrument of global inequality or will it be a catalyst for our collective growth? We must ensure that the Global South leads this technological revolution rather than remain a helpless spectator. Nevertheless, some of the initiatives we see from the Global South give a beacon of hope that we indeed can obtain technological advancement through foresight and leadership. A case in point is Ethiopia's initiative of five million quarters program and the soon to be commissioned University of Artificial Intelligence reaffirms that our continent is ready to build the future. Mr. President, Ethiopia remains steadfast and it is believed that the United Nations must be fundamentally reformed to best address the shifting global challenge. The UN reform must reflect our highest aspiration to witness an organization anchored in true equality and justice. Africa has waited for too long in the shadow of global decision-making. Now it is demanding immediate justice through the comprehensive reform of the United Nations Security Council. With genuine political goodwill, how can a world with a right conscience justify the denial of 1.6 billion Africans, the right to equal representation. That indeed is a generational quest for truth and for morality. Mr. President, Ethiopia has diligently worked to promote cooperation and regional integration through infrastructure development, trade, and people-to-people relationship in the home of Africa. We have achieved notable progress with several of our neighbors in spite of attempts by reckless external actors who are habitually engaged in fuming instability. Despite continued interference in our internal affairs by adversarial elements, we have exercised immense restraint and remained by the firm conviction of becoming one of the most prosperous and dynamic development engines in Africa. Our message to forces of destruction and mayhem is loud and clear. We urge them to respect the sacred right of the people of the Horn of Africa to live in peace and prosperity. Turning to the wider region, Ethiopia has consistently supported efforts by sub-regional and regional organizations to bring durable and lasting peace in the Sudan. We firmly believe that a peaceful resolution can only be achieved through a Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned peace process that reflects the true will and aspiration of the Sudanese people. Mr. President, Ethiopia will continue to commit to the realization of our overarching goal of building a democratic and prosperous country. The progress we have achieved so far on various facets of government reflects this firm and strong resolve. We recently held a democratic election that laid a strong foundation for a free, fair, and transparent political dispensation. Equally, in our relentless pursuit of building national consensus, the National Dialogue Commission has convened the first historical summit where citizens from every corner of the country and from all walks of life deliberate on critical issues of national importance. It has now opened a glorious new chapter in our political history that helped strengthen our democratic institutions. A significant leap has also been achieved in attaining food security. As part of fulfilling our commitment to enhance resilience to climate shock, we were able to produce an improved climate resilient wheat variety seed. In a very short period, we have transitioned from a wheat importer to one of the largest wheat producers in Africa. At a time where food provision has become a political battleground and the global food supply hangs precariously in the balance, we send a clear message that Africa can feed itself. Since the launch of the Green Legacy Initiative in 2019, we were able to plant 56 billion trees, which is not only expanding our forest coverage, but significantly restoring our ecosystem. At this stage, this initiative is expected to sequestering approximately 1.2 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide annually. As one of the powerhouses of clean energy, with a total potential of 60,000 MHz, Ethiopia targets to generate 13,000 MHz by 2030, aiming also to scale up our energy supply across East African power pool and beyond. In this regard, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam stands as a monumental pan-African clean energy project, providing that our shared waters and resources can generate progress and development for collective regional prosperity. Moreover, adding to Ethiopia's growing portfolio mega-projects executions, the government is investing in an international airport worth $12.5 billion, which will handle 110 million passengers and about 4 million tons of cargo annually. This project will play a Catholic role in the African continental free trade area. To sustain and scale up the success we have achieved in renewable energy, connectivity, food security, manufacturing, and urban development, Ethiopia calls for a genuine and sustained regional and international cooperation. Despite this tremendous achievement, Mr. President, we have come to recognize that our efforts to build a strong economy cannot generate a sustained development without reliable and dependable access to the sea. We believe that maritime access can be managed for the common benefit and progress of all countries in the region. It is upon this unwavering aspiration that we are pursuing all possible diplomatic avenues to secure access to and from the sea to ensure Ethiopia's integration into a global trading system. Mr. President, as we attend this August Assembly, we are reminded not only by the ideals and values of our organization, but of the imperatives we must uphold as enshrined in the Charter. We stand a better chance of surviving and succeeding if we continuously and collectively shape our collaboration. This will certainly revive multilateralism to meet the demands of the current and future generations. In conclusion, Mr. President, I give you my reassurance that Ethiopia remains steadfast as it has always been in its historic commitment in upholding human dignity, justice and the unyielding solidarity of all free peoples. I thank you, Mr. President. On behalf of the assembly I wish to thank the president of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. We have heard the last speaker in the general debate for this meeting, but...
