The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Alexander Stub, President of the Republic of Finland. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. President Trump, President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me just begin by paying tribute to the lady that is sitting right behind me, Ambassador Elina Kalkku. She is the Finnish UN representative and she has had an absolutely wonderful 44-year career in the Finnish diplomatic service and she will retire in the month of October and I would like to thank her for her services. And of course with her President speaking here you never know whether this will be the low point or the high point of her career. Be that as it may, former Secretary General Kofi Annan once said, and I quote, whatever our differences, we stand or fall together, end of quote. When we forget this wisdom of Kofi Annan, disorder is what happens. Last year, from this very podium, I stated that foreign policy is based on three pillars, values, interests, and power. This year I come with something much simpler, a choice, a choice between cooperation or conflict. In today's world, cooperation is undermined by a lack of trust, disregard for rules and the weakening of institutions. And we've heard that in so many speeches here today. Conflicts are spreading, bringing suffering, violence and injustice. According to some accounts, there are currently 65 active armed conflicts, more than at any time since the end of the Cold War. Now, competition will always be there. Nations compete now harder than they did a generation ago. This doesn't worry me. What does is that more and more of them now compete against the rules on which the international order rests. So, this speech defends these rules, and it calls for cooperation. It calls for multilateralism. Small nations need it to survive, and large nations need it to be great. Upholding the most basic rules, values and institutions is our best option to ensure that competition does not escalate into conflict and that cooperation gains ground. Now, I want to begin by analyzing how the world is changing today. And as a pragmatic fin, I will always try to deal with the world as it is, because it often helps in building a world that I wish we would have. In other words, a world which we can build together. I will then make a few suggestions about what we should do next. So here we go. I think we should all be steadfast defenders of multilateralism. As Strobe Talbot reportedly remarked, multilateralism is hell and can be a real pain in the neck, but it is the best option for humanity as a whole. We need multilateralism in order to address our shared agenda, ranging from conflicts and climate change to sustainable development and artificial intelligence. Currently, however, we seem to be going the other way, more towards a non-cooperative and multipolar world order. This order, as it turns out, is based on zero-sum deals, transactions, and unrestrained power. This is a short-sighted approach. Tempting as it may be for some, such a multipolar order will ultimately lead to conflict. It will turn against us, whether you represent a great power, a middle power, or a small state like Finland. Between these two approaches, there is, of course, a third option, plurilateralism. It means building ad hoc coalitions when global cooperation is unattainable. And this is my first observation today, the emergence of flexible forms of cooperation around different themes and interests, be it in the economy, climate, defense, or technology. Coalition building can be a force of good, but with one condition. It should not challenge multilateralism, but build on it. It should support the UN system, not substitute it. The Coalition of the Willing for Ukraine is particularly close to my heart. It's a group of countries working to end Russia's war of aggression. The war is unlawful, unjustified, and unprovoked. Its solution will have far-reaching consequences for Ukraine and beyond. It is really about upholding international rules. The coalition works for a just and lasting peace in Ukraine in accordance with the UN Charter. It seeks to uphold the basic tenets of the international order. My second observation is that everywhere I travel around the world, I hear the word realignment. Realignment, whether it is in Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia, or the Americans. Nations are seeking new alliances and partnerships. This is a logical consequence in times of uncertainty and transformation. You seek security where you can get it. We're seeing an intensification of regional integration, akin to what we saw in the immediate aftermath of World War II. Regional organizations like the African Union, Gulf Cooperation Council, Mercosur, ASEAN, or the EU build trust. When integration is not feasible, other forms of cooperation can prove essential. We Finns are happy to point out the historic signing of the Helsinki Final Act in 1975. It brought together 35 nations in the midst of the Cold War and laid the foundations for what would later become the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Why do I give this example? Because at the time there was no trust. There were deep disagreements and outright hostility. Yet there was room for a process that reduced tensions and built common ground. I believe regions such as the Middle East, where conflicts are raging today, may consider something similar. Even in the face of conflict and grievance, a region may be able to agree on principles that foster cooperation and prevent further conflict. My third observation is that a new economic world order is taking shape. Instruments once used for economic integration, such as trade, technology, energy, investment and supply chains, have become instruments of geopolitical competition There was perhaps at times a naive belief that interdependence would bring about stability and peace Now the focus on opportunities has been replaced by the focus on threats We've entered a world of coercion where dependencies are vulnerabilities. Countries seek choke points that can be weaponized to pressure others. But dependencies are complex. No nation, not even the biggest ones, can go it alone. All coercive actions come at a cost. And even if a mightier state dominates in the one domain, a smaller state can respond in another. In the new geopolitical environment, the economic order of the post-World War II era is seeking new forms. A new order must be based on a realistic understanding of the power balance in the world. We in the West must acknowledge that the global South and East are an expanding economic and political force. Many nations around the world have made remarkable advances in competence and know-how. We should put this collective expertise to work for the global common good. Countries are right to be wary of dangerous dependencies, but our focus on the threats should not lead us to abandoned cooperation. We should strive for an economic world order built on institutions and agreements. multilateralism is also needed in the global economy. Now this was the first part. It's all good and well to diagnose the problem. In other words too many nations now compete at the expense of basic rules and that is why the world has slipped into disorder. But it matters more to find a prescription which would bring us back to order, stability and cooperation. Thus I will offer you three remedies for a world in disorder. To begin with, we need to go back to the basics of international law. On my recent visit to India, I came across a quote from Mahatma Gandhi, and I quote, the breach of one rule inevitably leads to the breach of other rules, end of quote. These words resonate all too strongly today, so there is a kick-on effect of breaking the rules. We've moved back to a world defined by raw power and self-interest. Rules and values seem to be taking a back seat. Some are ready to throw in the towel, prepared to accept the defeat of the international rules-based order. That is an exaggeration. International law has been questioned and challenged before. It has never been a perfect system. But we must admit that we are at a critical juncture. Fundamental norms are being questioned in a way that erodes confidence in the entire multilateral system. Therefore the first remedy for a world in disorder is rule of law. Today international norms are often presented as an obstacle to the pursuit of national interest, this is both wrong and dangerous. International law has never been merely an effort to achieve universal justice, but neither can it be reduced to a mere instrument of domination. It is not only about values nor about interest, but about both. Despite the rhetoric, no major power is likely to give up its ability to shape the rules. That's why we see major power still engaged here in the United Nations. Even when actors claim to abandon the rules, they rather seek to replace existing rules with ones more to their liking. Therefore, we will not face a world without rules, but we could be facing a world with less predictability, less restraint, a world based on rules that are more permissive for the powerful. For the collective benefit of the nations in this hall, we should continue to defend the rule of law and uphold its most fundamental principles. They include independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of nations, freedom of navigation at sea, and accountability for the most serious international crimes. The second remedy is about humanitarian principles, many of which have been mentioned in the speeches here today. The world today has an unprecedented capacity to meet humanity's most pressing needs. Since the establishment of the United Nations, poverty has declined, access to basic education has expanded, literacy has increased, and child mortality has fallen. Yet, we are witnessing tyranny, disregard for the vulnerable, and violence against civilians in many parts of the world. Poverty and distress are still widespread. For example, Sudan is devastated by war. Millions have been displaced and many face famine. For example, Gaza continues to be one of the world's most acute humanitarian emergencies marked by mass displacement, the destruction of infrastructure, and the lack of essential services. For example, Haiti struggles with armed violence and extreme weather events, causing a displacement crisis, a hunger crisis, and a health crisis. We must not grow indifferent to wars and human suffering, but instead channel our efforts into preventing conflicts, upholding human rights, and strengthening sustainable economies. Our growing material prosperity should not come at the expense of our ethical responsibilities. Now, the third and final remedy is about language. In other words, how we treat each other. Unfortunately, there is no shortage of examples of those who use dismissive language to describe others and entire groups of people. Too often, those with the most provocative rhetoric receive the greatest visibility. Provocation is rewarded with attention, excess is misinterpreted as courage, and exaggeration as truth. Language can foster cooperation, but it can also break the trust and turn competition into conflict. The recipe is simple but necessary. Avoid polarization, strengthen trust, and listen to others. We need a dignified foreign policy, and that starts here in the United Nations. Now, ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude with the following remarks. I would like to thank Secretary General Guterres for his service and his dedication to reforming and rationalizing the UN system. This work must continue. Every Secretary General is shaped both by their era and by their own actions. And I was reminded of this when I recently read the biographies of two former Secretaries General, Yutant and Kofi Annan, both highly influential leaders who navigated an era of great power tensions. Let me put forward a few suggestions for the new Secretary General's consideration, whoever she may be. And for the international community at large. Now, since my first speech here two years ago, I've consistently called for a reformed security council. The world has changed, and so should the UN. There should be at least two new permanent seats for Africa, two for Asia Pacific, and one for Latin America. No single state should have veto power, and if a member of the Security Council violates a UN charter, its voting rights should be suspended. The world needs a functioning UN Security Council. To move forward, we need to break the impasse and be open for creative solutions. The need for reform also extends to the global economic architecture. It must be updated to reflect today's power balance. We have to make sure that international economic cooperation continues to be rules-based, legitimate, and representative. Multilateral solutions are needed in an increasingly multipolar world. We must also bring the United Nations back to peace mediation. The Secretary General as mediator-in-chief will have a key role. The UN's legitimacy as a mediator is unique. Together, the UN and its member states can accomplish what neither can achieve alone. The UN needs to be at the center of rulemaking and institution building. Regional integration and thematic coalitions can and should support it. Now let me finish by saying that artificial intelligence is the most consequential technology in the history of mankind. It will impact science, the economy, politics, security, and the very essence of our humanity. Humans can and should be in the driver's seat. We have a choice. We can compete, cooperate, or slow down. But for me, cooperation is the best way forward. This is why Norway and Finland have, together with leaders from nations around the world, launched a call for companies, governments, regional organizations, and the UN to develop mechanisms to control frontier AI models. And I would really like for as many UN member states as possible to join this initiative. My country, Finland, wants the United Nations to succeed and will remain strongly engaged in its work. Therefore, we are standing for an election to the Security Council from 2029 to 2030. We are motivated by our belief in the UN Charter and the values it stands for. We will prioritize peace, people and partnerships. We are willing to take on the responsibility of the Council membership at a time that calls for more peace. We want people and nations to thrive. We believe in dialogue and cooperation. Finally, let me make a procedural proposal. The foundations of the United States were built in San Francisco over 80 years ago. Today, we must restore balance to the world order. We must recommit to the fundamental principles of the international order, and we must embrace cooperation over conflict. What the world needs now is a new San Francisco moment, a moment where the world leaders come together to chart a way forward. A process to achieve this should start with a new Secretary General. Thank you very much. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Finland.
