The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Mahmadi Dumbia, President of the Republic of Guinea. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Thank you. Mr. President of the 81st session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, Mr. Secretary General of the United Nations, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Heads of State and government. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, heads of delegation, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. President, at the outset, I wish to convey to you, on behalf of the sovereign peoples of the Republic of Guinea and our delegation, our warmest congratulations upon your election to the presidency of this 81st session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. I cherish the hope that our proceedings under your skillful stewardship will allow the United Nations, our organization, to best address and meet the legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the world. I also wish to applaud the continuous and consistent efforts of the Secretary General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, at the helm of our United Nations. It is with a profound feeling of pride and of humility that I speak before this august body on behalf of the sovereign people of the Republic of Guinea, as we seek to describe to the international community the progress that my country has achieved. Ladies and gentlemen, three years ago, from this rostrum, I, with the candor that my country and our continent are bound by, I spoke the truth and I stated that the model of imported governance without being adapted on our continent was not generating the fruits that had been expected by our peoples. And this is something which I stand by. But today I am once again speaking before you with a different mindset. I do not seek to denounce, but rather to share with you, to share with you factual elements about the progress and the headway that has been made by the Republic of Guinea as we have achieved results that have emanated from the choices that we have made. On the basis of our constitution, the Republic of Guinea organized an entire direct presidential and legislative communal elections, and we've established all institutions which are entirely financed by our Treasury. And I state this with a rightful sense of pride that none of these elections that were held throughout our territory, none of these elections were marred by any significant incidents on the part of any of the participants in this electoral process. And this reflects the fact, ladies and gentlemen, that a country can organize independently, using its own resources, credible, peaceful, and transparent elections. This constitution that we have adopted introduces profound innovations in terms of peaceful coexistence, as well as greater representation of our localities and our communities, as well as novel guarantees for peaceful transfer of power, and includes recognition of our cultural, linguistic, religious, and cultural plurality as the bedrock of our nation and not as a divisive factor. and this I state with a sense of legitimate pride all of these elections were organized on our soil once again without any assistance from any party whatsoever ladies and gentlemen I have not I did not come here to exercise in rhetoric but I do believe it is worthwhile to share with you to share a simple overview and a useful useful information about what our Republic of Guinea has achieved in less than three years we have paved more than a thousand kilometers of roads which have connected our regions we have the Simandu megaproject which is Africa's largest mining and infrastructure project which is currently complete we have schools and hospitals that have been built throughout all of the Republic of Guinea. Three aluminum refineries which are under construction as we seek to transform our bauxite on our own soil. We have Africa's largest gold refinery, which is currently operational, and this has already been completed, and we have a sustainable and responsible socio-economic development program for my country for the next 15 years that I referred to the Simandu 2040 project. The Simandu 2040 program embodies a structural transformation initiative for our economy. This is not merely a mining project. This represents a meaningful strategic lever in order to accelerate the development of infrastructure as well as agriculture, energy, education, health, not to mention these are just a few. And these are results that we have achieved in less than three months. And I'm not mentioning them merely out of a sense of hope. They reflect a conviction which I wish to share with this General Assembly. Our most valuable asset remains our youth, and we must provide them with high-quality education, with training opportunities reflected to meet the needs of the labor market through the Simandu Academy Initiative, as well as meaningful opportunities for employment and entrepreneurship. Ladies and gentlemen, heads of state and government, our recent experience permits me respectfully to state a certitude When governance models are tailored to reflect the historical, social, and cultural realities of each nation, rather than haphazardly being imposed, that is when development accelerates. Let us consider Asia. Let us consider certain nations in the Middle East. They did not wait for an external model to be endorsed in order to become prosperous. They drew inspiration from the universal experience, while at the same time tailoring that to their national brilliance. In one generation, they managed to achieve what others spent a century attaining. Africa too can embark upon this path. This is not reflective of a rejection of the world nor rejection of international cooperation. Quite to the contrary, this is a call for win-win partnership. A partnership that is respectful of the sovereignty of each nation, rooted in win-win collaboration, rather than pre-established arrangements which disregard our realities. The Republic of Guinea, for our part, is and shall remain a reliable, open, engaged partner, open, reliable, and engaged vis-à-vis the international community, while engaging in mutual respect for the sovereignty of one and all. Mr. President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, the Republic of Guinea is advancing. We are making headway by harnessing our own means, by capitalizing upon our own choices for the benefit of our own people, and we are doing so in a manner that is in accordance with international law, with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and in spirit of candid and inclusive cooperation with all of our partners. I cherish the hope that this Guinea experience can, to a modest degree, stimulate more in-depth consideration into the manifold, legitimate development pathways for our continent. Thank you for your attention. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Guinea.
