The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Tidoro Ngema Obieng Mangu, Vice President in Charge of National Defense and Security of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Thank you. Mr. Khalilou Rahman, President of the General Assembly, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, Excellencies, Heads of State and Government, and Heads of Delegation, Ladies and Gentlemen. I have the honor to take the floor before this General Assembly on behalf of and representing His Excellency Obiang Ngema Mbastogo, President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to express to you his greetings of peace and the greetings of the people of Equatorial Guinea, and to reaffirm our support for and commitment to the Charter of the United Nations. I congratulate Mr. Khalilur Rahman on his election to the presidency of this 81st session, And I express our gratitude to Ms. Annalena Baerbock for her work during the previous session. Mr. President, the theme of this session is Restoring Trust, Managing Transformation, a United Nations that delivers for all. This theme invites us to consider international cooperation in a world that is subject to profound challenges. For Equatorial Guinea, trust is strengthened when we fulfill commitments that have been made and decisions that have been adopted collectively, and when visible results can be produced. The countries of the Global South need cooperation that preserves peace, that drives sustainable and inclusive growth, and that expands the ability of each state to build its own future. Therefore, 21st century cooperation should provide opportunities for the mobilisation of financing, to transform raw materials, and to develop one's own knowledge and technologies. Excellencies, this vision is especially relevant for Africa, which needs investments that can allow it to develop local value chains, build infrastructure, advance industrialization, strengthen human capital incorporate new technologies and generate employment especially for the continent's large youth population. A more productive and industrialized Africa will be a stronger partner to the benefit of all of those wanting to halt its immigration. Excellencies, when the 2030 Agenda was adopted, the world embraced its deeply human vision, eradicating poverty, protecting the planet, and making sure that all people can live with dignity, leaving no one behind. However, as we approach its end date, we are far from meeting its goals. Poverty persists, inequality is expanding, and climate change continues to rage. It is clear that we need an international financial architecture that facilitates productive investments that takes into account the real vulnerabilities of developing countries and supports the efforts of each nation. It is therefore urgent to implement the resolutions adopted at the conferences in Addis Abeba in 2015 and in Seville last year. Mr. President, development requires peace and stability. Equatorial Guinea defends dialogue, negotiation, mediation, and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Our own experience demonstrates this. Guinea and the Gabonese Republic are a clear example of commitment to peaceful settlement, because they submitted their territorial disputes to the International Court of Justice. Today, both states continue to make progress on implementation through bilateral dialogue. We express our recognition and gratitude for the valuable support of the United Nations and the African Union in that process, in which we have shown that it is possible to preserve ties of friendship, cooperation, and good neighborliness. At the same time, Equatorial Guinea has its doors wide open for investors and partners from around the world. We are an African country in which you will find stability, tax advantages, opportunities, and a partner that is prepared to build relationships of mutual benefit and shared profit. Mr. President, distinguished delegations, Restoring trust means showing that working together produces results And managing transformation means turning the challenges of our time into new opportunities Africa brings together 54 United Nations member states and represents a fundamental share of the political and demographic reality of the 21st century. We must move towards a more balanced international community in which Africa participates fully in global decisions and strengthens its ability to lead its own development. Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the African common position as enshrined in the Esselwini Consensus and the CERT Declaration, which calls for two permanent seats with veto right for Africa, as well as two additional non-permanent seats on the Security Council. Mr. President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen Respect for international law Sovereign equality and friendship with all peoples Is what guides Equatorial Guinea's foreign policy Based on that position We encourage the United States of America And the Republic of Cuba to continue to pursue paths of dialogue which will make it possible to end the blockade and build a relationship of mutual benefit. Moreover, we see the United Nations as a universal space for pursuing solutions to shared problems. Equatorial Guinea maintains its trust in this organization because cooperation among nations remains the most certain path towards preserving peace and building shared prosperity. We also thank Mr. Antonio Guterres for his years of service as Secretary General, for his commitment to peace, and to the attention he has paid to Africa. On behalf of President Obiang Nguyen Mbassogo, the Government and the people of Equatorial Guinea, we express our gratitude to him. Excellencies, I will conclude by saying that the history of the United Nations shows that peace and prosperity can move ahead when nations work together. And it is in that regard that Equatorial Guinea will continue to contribute, based on mutual respect, sovereign equality and dialogue, to turn our cooperation into development and opportunities for future generations. Thank you very much. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Vice President in charge of National Defense and Security of the Equatorial Guinea.
