The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Tainiti Maa Mau, President and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Immigration of the Republic of Kiribati. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. so Thank you. And you can see the light on the left. So, it's so much like the light is there. So, you can see the light is there. And that's it. as you can see, you can see the light on the turn. The light is here, and the light is there, Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, Excellencies, Distinguished Heads of States and Governments, Ladies and gentlemen, in the name of Almighty God in whom we place our trust, on behalf of the government and the people of Kiribati, I extend our warmest congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your election to preside and lead this 81st session of the United Nations General Assembly. Gilebas assures you of our full support and cooperation as you undertake this important responsibility. Mr. President, we meet today at a difficult moment. Conflicts continue to claim lives and displace communities. Human rights continue to be violated. Humanitarian crisis persists. Development gains are being reversed in many parts of the world. Inequality remains entrenched, while climate change places additional pressure on the communities already confronting significant development challenges. It is therefore fitting that the theme of this 81st session is restoring trust, managing transformation, a United Nations that delivers for whole. This theme is both timely and relevant. Trust cannot be restored by words alone. It must be strengthened through implementation. accountability and results that improve the lives of our people. For Gilibus, the theme reaffirms our shared duty to strengthen the United Nations and ensure it serves everyone. Mr. President, Gilibus is an ocean nation. We are a big ocean sustainable state. Our economy, food security, livelihoods, culture, and the way of life depend on healthy, sustainable marine resources. Sustainable management is essential to our long-term developments, and we call for increased efforts and partnerships to have aggregatable progress towards SDG 14, which is to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development. The 2026 Sustainable Development Goals Report reminds us that our oceans and fisheries continue to face mounting pressures from overfishing, illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, pollution, warming, and acidification. The entry into force of the biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction agreement marks an important step towards stronger and more equitable ocean governance. Gilibez is proud to have signed and ratified this agreement and calls on member states to recognize the vital importance of our shared oceans and to work collectively to translate the agreement's historic ambition into its meaningful global action. Mr. President, the sustainability of our ocean and fisheries is closely linked to the changing climate, and the pressures we face on our marine resources are increasingly compounded by its impact. Climate remains one of the most pressing challenges to our development and the way of life. Sea level rise, coastal erosion, salt water intrusion, and extreme weather events continue to place pressure on our communities, infrastructure, water security, and livelihoods. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 6 assessment report reinforces the agency of these challenges, and particularly the risk faced by small island states. Through our long-term national development mission, the Gidibas' vision for 20 years, our national priorities under the Muslim policies, we continue to invest in resilience infrastructure. water security, coastal protection, disaster preparedness, renewable energy, and community-based adaptation. Our objective is clear, to continue building a wealthy, healthy, and peaceful Kiribati, where our people can live with dignity, in peace, and with opportunities. Renewable energy is increasingly important to Gilibert's development and energy access. We therefore see greater investment in renewable energy as an important opportunity to reduce our reliance on imported fossil fuels and strengthen the resilience and sustainability of our energy sector. But national action must be matched by international action. We call for great ambition, stronger support for adaptation and climate finance that is adequate, predictable, and accessible, particularly for small island developing states. Gili Buss recognizes the importance of international law in addressing climate change. The International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion on Climate Change advances climate justice by affirming that all states have binding duties to protect the climate system and achieve deep, rapid, and sustained greenhouse gas reductions consistent with limiting warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. We welcome growing recognition that climate resilience must be locally owned and driven. The Pacific Resilience Facility is a Pacific-led, Pacific-owned mechanism that strengthens the region's capacity to finance climate and disaster resilience. The Pacific co-hosting of COP31 with Turkey later this year further demonstrates the value of local action. These initiatives also show that strong, genuine partnerships can sustain locally-led development. Mr. President, partnership continues to shape international cooperation as we believe that we are stronger when we work together. At a time when multilateralism faces growing challenges, partnership remains one of our most powerful affirmations of what we can achieve collectively. Kiliber reaffirms its support for frameworks that embody the spirit of partnership, including the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for CIT, ABES, and the Pacific for the Future, which provide important foundations for strengthening international cooperation, solidarity, and collective action. As the 2030 Agenda enters its final years, partnership must remain central to accelerating SDG progress. GILIBAS recently presented its second voluntary national review, VNNAR, reaffirming our commitment to the 2030 Agenda. We value our long-standing diplomatic relations with traditional partners and welcome countries seeking new partnerships based on mutual respect, shared interest, transparency, sovereign equality, and respect for our national priorities. This year, following the submission of our second VNNAR, my government convenes its first Development Partners Forum on Christmas Island, which we highly value as the world's largest coral atoll and the first island to see each new day's sunrise. This forum strengthened partnerships between Gilibus and its development partners and showcased two flagship projects critical to accelerating economic growth and sustainable development. Participants included Australia, the People's Republic of China, the European Union, New Zealand, Japan, the United States of America, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the UN agencies. We thank our partners and look forward to advancing our shared interests under the forum's outcome document we call the Christmas Partnership Accord 2026. Mr. President, ultimately, development depends on people, our most valuable resource, making education a vital investment. Gilevers is committed to expanding access to quality, inclusive, relevant education while strengthening skills development, vocational training, digital learning, and opportunities for young people. Health is equally fundamental. We continue to strengthen our health systems across our widely dispersed and remote islands, improve access to essential services, and address both communicable and non-communicable diseases. Healthy and educated population is the foundation upon which every other national priority rests. Mr. President, we cannot speak about development without speaking about women and youth. Gillibus remains committed to gender equality and empowering women and girls. Our election nearly this year to the Commission on the Status of Women, the first time Kiribati has secured a seat on this UN body, is a significant milestone, reflecting our determination to advance women's rights nationally and globally. We will expand opportunities, prevent violence, and promote women's economic empowerment and leadership. Our youth, meanwhile, represent not simply the future of Kiribati. We must provide them with education, employment, skills, technology, leadership opportunities, and spaces where they can contribute. And one of those spaces is support. Kiribati will lose the 2030 Micronesian Games, which we intend to use to leave a lasting legacy for our young people. We invite our regional and international partners to join us in this endeavor. For Kiribati's On Peace and Security Mr. President, Kiribati is a peaceful nation. Yet distance does not make a difference to the suffering caused by war and conflicts elsewhere. The people of every nation deserve peace. We reaffirm that disputes must be resolved peacefully in accordance with the international law and the principles of the United Nations chart. For Highland nations such as Kilibus, respect for international law is fundamental to our security, sovereignty, and stability of the international system. Kilibus is proud to contribute in our own way to international peace and security through the service of our police officers under the United Nations flag. For Kiribati, this is an expression of our belief that even the smallest country can contribute to global peace. For Pacific people, the consequences of nuclear weapons are not merely historical. Our region bears the human and environmental legacy of nuclear testing. As state parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, we remain committed to advancing the treaty's humanitarian objectives and establishing an international trust fund for nuclear weapons victims. As Coaches with Kazakhstan of the recent international meeting on victim assistance and environmental remediation, we thank the Secretary General for convening this important meeting and for keeping the needs of affected communities at the center of our collective efforts. Peace and security must also keep pace with emerging threats in the digital domain. Tahis-Mikronesian cable landed in Tarawa last year, connecting Gilibus with Nauru and the Federated State of Micronesia, transforming our connectivity and digital environment. However, it also creates vulnerabilities. With limited redundancy and technical capacity, Ireland states face threats including cybercrime, critical infrastructure attacks, and ransomware and online arms that can undermine security and development. Your Excellencies, Gerebis comes to this assembly not simply to speak of the challenges we face. We come to speak of the future we choose. Allow me to close, Mr. President, by bestowing upon the United Nations and all its members and knowledge staff our traditional blessings of the Maori, the Rai, or the Tubermo, meaning abundant health, peace, and prosperity. I thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Immigration of the Republic of Kiribati. Thank you.
