I now give the floor to His Excellency Tong Sa-wan Pong-Via, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Lao People's Democratic Republic. Perfect happy 5000€ Mr. President, at the outset, allow me to express my warmest congratulations to His Dr. Khalil Rahman on his election as the President of the 81st Session of the United Nations General Assembly. My delegation assure you of our full support and cooperation throughout your presidency. and I also express our deep appreciation to Her Excellency Annalena Baerbock for her dedicated leadership during the ATE session. The theme for this session, Restoring Trust, Managing Transformation, a united nation that delivers for all rise at the pivotal junction. For developing and vulnerable countries, a one resources and responsive united nations is an indispensable anchor. Restoring trust in our international system requires us to uphold predictable support, honor commitments and reaffirm our fidelity to the UN Charter. For the Lao PDR, restoring and deepening trust begins with renewed commitment to inclusive multilateralism with the United Nations at the core. When dialogue is guided by mutual respect, transparency, and genuine cooperation, multilateralism yields tangible benefit for all people. Mr. President, our world continues to confront severe multifaceted tensions, geopolitical crisis and tensions, microeconomic instability, supply chain disruption, and accelerating climate emergencies. countries. These headwinds place immense strain on the most vulnerable economies where rising energy and food prices jeopardize the livelihood of millions of people in countries in special situation. The ongoing conflicts in the Middle East demonstrate how rapidly confrontation can destabilize global stability. Sustainable peace cannot be fought through force or unilateral action. It requires diplomacy, respect for of sovereign equality and territorial integrity and strict adherence to international law. The question of Palestine remains an enduring test of multilateral credibility. We remain deeply concerned by humanitarian catastrophe and means reconstruction requirement in Gaza as well as mounting challenges in the West Bank. To prevent the two-state solution from slipping beyond the reach, the international community must secure a just, comprehensive and lasting peace on last bit and one that fulfills the legitimate rights to the Palestinian people to self-determination through an independent state of Palestine with full membership in the United Nations. In the same vein, the Laopedia reiterates its principal position against unilateral cohesive measures. and bilateral cohesive measures. The prolonged economic, commercial and financial embargo against the Republic of Cuba continues to inflict hardship on its people. We call for the immediate and unconditioned lifting of these sanctions, including logistic and energy blockades and removal of Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism. Such steps are essential for humanitarian measures toward restoring trust and reaffirming the primacy of international law. Mr. President, the gap between commitment and delivery on climate change equally tests the credibility of multilateralism. Although the Laupediate has contributed only a small share of global greenhouse gas emissions, our people are increasingly affected by floods, droughts, and extreme weather conditions. The Laupediate remains fully committed to the Paris Agreement and its nationally determined contributions. However, climate ambitions must be matched by adequate, predictable and accessible climate finance, technology transfer and capacity building to enable vulnerable developing states. to adapt, build long-term resilience and pursue long-carbon growth pathways. Mr. President, the Laupita welcome the UNAT's initiative to enhance the coherence, transparency and effectiveness of the UN system. Systematic reform must ensure a balanced approach across the three pillars of organizations, peace and security, sustainable development and human rights. The implementation of the Pact of the Future and the Global Digital Compact must focus on narrowing the digital divide. Artificial intelligence and digital technologies must serve human development, strengthen local technical capacities, and respect national development priorities. Mr. President, as an active member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the La PDA reaffirmed that a united, integrated ASEAN serve as a cornerstone of regional peace and multilateral stability. We remain steadfast in supporting ASEAN centrality within the evolving regional architecture, where ASEAN-led mechanism forces trust and practical cooperation. This year carries special significance as we begin implementing the ASEAN Community Vision 2045. Alongside its strategic plans across the three community pillars, it also marks the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia. A foundational framework whose core principles of peace, coexistence and mutual respect remain fully relevant today. ASEAN remains the bedrock of the Laopediya's regional engagement. Mr. President, Despite severe external economic shocks and natural disaster, the Lao economy continues its steady recovery through strong national ownership and strategic international partnership. Guided by our sovereign and self-reliant economic policy, the Laopita has adopted its 10th National Social Economic Development Plan for a period of 2026 and 2013. The 10th National Social Economic Development Plan focuses on six core national outcomes. First, executing a sovereign and self-reliant economic policy aiming for steady annual GDP growth of 6% or higher. The second, developing high-quality human resources capable of driving technology transition. Third, improving living standards, ensuring balanced urban rural development and alleviating poverty. Fourth, protecting natural resources, building climate resilience and mitigating disaster risk. 5. Enhancing regional and global economic integration and connectivity 6. Strengthening the efficiency and transparency of public administration and governance Central to this strategy is transforming the Lao PDR from the landlocked countries into landlink regional gateway strategic infrastructure including the Laos-China Railway, the Laos-Vietnam Railway project, expanded transit corridors and access to the sea via Vung Ang International Port are actively driving regional trade and integration. Our long-term vision toward 2055 aims to firmly establish established the Laupeda as an upper-middle-income nation with a sustainable, inclusive growth and its core. Mr. President, this year is a landmark milestone in our national development. The Laupeda remains fully committed to its four-month graduation from least developed country status in accordance with relevant General Assembly resolution. As the UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres rightly stated, LDC graduation must be a reward, never a punishment. To safeguard our hard-won development gains and prevent structural setbacks, we are executing a robust smooth transition strategy for a period of 2026 to 2029. We call on our international partners to provide predictable transition support, extend smoothly adjustment regarding international support measures. I expand concessional financing to build enduring economic resilience. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development remains fully embedded within our national planning as we prepare to present our four voluntary national review at the 2027 High Level Political Forum. We remain dedicated to an open, transparent assessment of our progress. For the Lao PDR, the nexus between peace and development is the life experience. As a country heavily impacted by wartime cluster munitions for over five decades, we have placed unexplored ordnance clearance at the heart of our development agenda through the national SDG 18. Life is safe from UXO. Removing UXO is not merely a technical task. It's about restoring fundamental safety and securing agricultural land and reclaiming development opportunities for our communities. Building on this commitment, the Laopedia proudly hosted the third review conference of the Convention on Cluster Munition early this month in Vientiane under the theme Accelerating Progress Towards the World Free from the Threat of Cluster Munitions. Our presidency demonstrated that mind action is an indispensable foundation for poverty reduction, human dignity and sustainable development. Mr. President, as Secretary General Antonio Guterres prepared to complete his distinguished tenor at the help of our organization, the government and the people of the Laopediya wish to express our profound appreciation and heartfelt gratitude for his principal leadership, modern clarity, and unwavering dedication to the United Nations, a true and trusted friend of the Laopediya and fellow peace-loving developing nations across the global South. Secretary General Guterres will be warmly remembered for his tireless advocacy for international financial architecture reform, climate justice, sustainable development financing, and the dignity of the countries in special situations. situation. His legacy of solidarity and bold championing of equity would continue to inspire our collective multilateral effort for years to come. Mr. President, in conclusion, the Laupeda firmly believes that the United Nations remains the essential home of global cooperation. No single nation can overcome today's complex global challenges alone. Let us unite our collective strength, renew our trust in multilateralism, and work together to build a peaceful, resilient, and prosperous world where no nation and people is left behind. I thank you. I thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Lao People's Democratic Republic. I now give the floor.
