The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Samuel Nsokane Maticane, Prime Minister and Minister of Defense and National Security of the Kingdom of Lesotho. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Cool dropping Mr. President, excellencies, at the outset, allow me to extend my warm and heartfelt congratulations to you on your election as president of the 81st session of the General Assembly. Your election reflects the confidence of member states in your steadfast commitment to multilateral system, and your vision for a United Nations that is responsive, effective, and capable of delivering for humanity. As you embark on this important journey, my delegation reaffirms its unwavering commitment to working closely with you and all Member States to ensure a productive and successful session. I also pay tribute to your predecessor, Her Excellency Ms. Babock, President of the ATF session of the General Assembly, with whom my delegation had the honor to serve as Vice President. Her dedicated leadership, skill and tenacity of purpose in strengthening multilateral cooperation during a period of profound global uncertainty gave us hope that the future of this organization can be secured when all nations work together for the common goal of leaving no one behind. To the Secretary General, Mr. Antonio Guderisch, whose tenor is approaching an end, my delegation commends his exemplary leadership and commitment to the ideals of the United Nations. During his term, the world confronted unprecedented challenges. From the COVID-19 pandemic to the eruption of new conflicts, the catastrophic effects of climate change and unstable trade regimes, throughout this crisis, he remained the moral force and steady anchor of the organization. We salute him for his distinguished service and will fondly cherish his historic visit to the Mountain Kingdom in December 2024, during which he witnessed firsthand of the dividends of the UN's contribution to Lesotho. Mr. President, the theme for this session, restoring trust, managing transformation, a United Nations that delivers for all, Resonate deeply with Lesotho's aspirations for a more inclusive, transparent and result-oriented multilateral system, capable of advancing respect for international law, maintaining global peace and security, accelerating sustainable development, protecting human rights, driving climate action, and implementing long-overdue institutional reforms. Lesotho has restored national peace and security following successive episodes of political and security unrest. With the support of the United Nations, the African Union, SADAC, and other friendly nations, we have reclaimed our rightful place among the community of nations as a stable and peaceful country. We therefore attest that preventative diplomacy remains the most effective means of evading conflict and ensuring sustainable peace. To create an environment conducive to inclusive growth and development, we continue to advance constitutional reforms aimed at strengthening democratic governance and the rule of law. We remain committed to accountability, professionalism, and respect for human rights. For all sectors of society, we recognize that culture of peace requires strong institutions that negate violence in all its forms. An independent judiciary capable of delivering justice impartially and efficiently to restore public trust. Mr. President, we must acknowledge that climate change is no longer a future threat, but a present reality. Lesotho is increasingly experiencing severe floods and droughts, resulting in unparalleled land degradation and extensive damage to critical infrastructure. Despite contributing minimally to global greenhouse gas emissions, least developed countries like Lesotho bear a heavy brand of climate impact. Global warming and rising sea levels pose terrible threats, particularly to small islands developing states. we stand in solidarity with these nations and call for greater global action. To cope with these climate-related challenges, we call upon developed countries to honor their commitments by providing new, adequate, predictable and accessible climate finance. Further, we urge developed countries to transfer environmentally sound technology and to strengthen capacity of developing countries to effectively mitigate and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change. Climate justice demands nothing less. Just energy transition is therefore an imperative if humanity is to be spared from the terrible threat of climate change. Under the visionary leadership of His Majesty King Letia III, Lesotho has launched the His Majesty King Letia III Just Energy Transition Fund, designed not only to decarbonize our economy, but to transform it from one historically reliant on migrant labor to one rooted in renewable energy exports. The fund seeks to attract investment to build new energy generation capacity, unlock energy independence, and lay a new foundation for national prosperity that benefits every Musoto. We therefore call for partnerships to mobilize the requisite resources for clean energy projects, which can create significant employment opportunities for our youth and women. As the first member of state to pilot the UN blueprint for national AI and data strategies from design into national implementation, Lesotho stands ready to share the lessons of that journey with fellow developing countries, particularly across Africa and among least developed and landlocked developing countries. Chatting similar paths towards digital sovereignty, central to that experience has been the value of the United Nations system acting as one. coordinated around priorities that we ourselves defined. Rather than delivered through separate and uncoordinated channels, this is what the United Nations that delivers for all looks like in practice. And we commend this model to the organization as it advances the UN8 initiative. we further stand ready to contribute our experience to emerging instruments such as the proposed Global Fund for AI Capacity Building. So that the compromise of artificial intelligence may be governed responsibly and shared equitably among all nations, we are grateful for the UN's continued support in this digital transformation journey. Mr. President, the Kingdom of Lesotho remains committed to the 2030 Agenda. We have accelerated reforms in business development, trade facilitation, public financial management, youth empowerment, and renewable energy. Yet challenges persist. Economic diversification remains limited. Youth unemployment stands at 38%, and climate-related shocks and equality continue to constrain inclusive transformation. With only three years remaining until 2030, we appeal to the international community to honor their official development assistance commitments, which is an essential step in restoring trust. We further call for reform of the international financial architecture to make it more equitable, fit for purpose, and responsive to the needs of developing countries, as agreed at the Fourth Summit for Financing for Development, FFD4, held in Seville, Spain last year. We also urge full implementation of the outcomes of the Third Summit of Landlocked Developing Countries, held in Awasa, Turkmenistan, in August 2025. The implementation of these outcomes, without further delay, together with the Pact of the Future, will undoubtedly help restore eroded trust. Mr. President, universal health coverage remains central to our development agenda. While investments have been made, we continue to face serious public health challenges, including a high burden of communicable and non-commutable disease and equalities in access to health. Lesotho is undertaking reforms to strengthen our health care system and invite partnerships to ensure universal access to quality primary health medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and robust disease surveillance and pandemic preparedness. The social and economic costs of cancer are profound. With support from the International Atomic Energy Agency, Lesotho is developing its first radiotherapy and nuclear medicine facility to provide domestic oncology services. We therefore call for enhanced cooperation in technology sharing, capacity building, and sustainable health financing to build resilient health systems capable of responding to current and emerging challenges. Mr. President, migration is not an abstract concept for the people of Lesotho. It is a daily lived reality. It is woven into our social fabric as human ambition rooted dignity, opportunity, and aspiration. Migration benefits countries of origin. transit countries and destination countries contribute to skills development, cultural exchange and shared economic growth. We must therefore strengthen international cooperation to ensure migration contributes meaningfully to deeper human understanding and sustainable development. development. Guided by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we must guarantee the full enjoyment of human rights by migrants, regardless of status. Protecting their dignity and fundamental freedoms is not only a legal obligation, it is a moral imperative. Mr. President, we welcome progress under the UNAT initiative and appreciate efforts to enhance efficiency, effectiveness and coherence within the UN system. As deliberations continue, reforms must remain guided by intergovernmental agreed mandates and member states' priorities. Any measures undertaken should preserve the UN's capacity to deliver across all pillars of its work and maintain meaningful impact on the ground. Mr. President, as we contemplate the future of community of nations, we must renew our collective commitment to a United Nations that is more inclusive, effective, and responsive to modern times global challenges, and one in which developing countries, particularly African nations, have a stronger voice in global decision-making. We reiterate our support for comprehensive reform of the Security Council, in line with the Esulwini Council, to make it more representative, equitable and reflective of our current geopolitical realities. The Kingdom of Lesotho reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, multilateral system and the rule of law. International law remains the cornerstone of sovereign equality. peace coexistence and sustainable development. Mr. President, the rise in regional conflict is cause for deep concern. We call for effective diplomatic solutions to secure lasting peace in Ukraine, the Middle East, Sudan, and Eastern DRC. We welcome the ceasefire framework and stabilization arrangement in Gaza and call for sustained engagement to achieve a lasting solution based on the 1967 borders, where Israelis and Palestinians coexist in peace and harmony. Regarding the broader conflict in the Gulf, we urge all parties to intensify efforts towards a speedy resolution as its economic impact is dire and devastating, for humanity cannot continue to bear the high cost of these wars. We should draw inspiration from the wisdom of Chief Moshlomi, one of our renowned diplomats, who advised Morena Mosheswede I, the founding father of the Basuti Nation, that it is better to a thrash cone than sharpen the spear. As the United Nations, we must continue investing in conflict prevention and building strong democratic institutions grounded in good governance, peace and respect for international law. Mr. President, my delegation continues to call for the lifting of long-standing sanctions on Cuba and Zimbabwe. These measures deprive innocent civilians of their right to development. In conclusion, Lesotho firmly believes that cooperation, solidarity and shared responsibility are the only viable path towards a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future. Let us recommit ourselves to a multilateral system that delivers tangible results for humanity, protects our planet, promotes peace and international security, and ensures that no one is left behind. I thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister and Minister of Defense and National Security of the Kingdom of Lesotho.
