I now give the floor to His Excellency Nasser Burrita, Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Cooperation and Moroccans Abroad of Morocco. Amen. Thank you. Your Excellency, President of the General Assembly, Mr. Secretary General, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen. I extend my sincere congratulations on behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco to his excellency mr khalil rahman on his election as president of the general assembly at its 81st session and i wish him every success in his lofty mission i also commend the tireless efforts of secretary general antonio guterush since he assumed the leadership of our organization amid the major divisions the world has experienced over the past decade he has emerged as a voice of wisdom, consensus, and pragmatism, defending tirelessly and courageously the United Nations system and international law as the two fundamental pillars for the maintenance of international peace and security. Mr. Guterres has remained a symbol of multilateral diplomacy and of international cooperation in overcoming the turmoil and obstacles facing our world today. Mr. President, the most apt description of our international reality is the one expressed by His Majesty King Mohammed VI. May God assist him when His Majesty said, and I quote, the world is changing at an unprecedented pace and certainties are steadily receding. This has led to a blurring of standards and concepts. Alliances have become open to question. International law is frequently violated. And its capacity to regulate international relations faces numerous challenges. End of quote from His Majesty the King. We are therefore facing a world whose fundamental features are the following. First, the escalation of acute and diverse international crises, military, economic, energy-related and environmental. Second, the spread of confrontational tendencies as a key determinant of relations between states. Third, the difficulty of predicting the outcome of crises. We know when they begin, but not when they will end. Fourth, the diminishing capacity of existing regulatory structures to play the role in preventing and managing crises. In this complex international context, Mr. President, I wish to focus on three areas to which the international community must accord priority. First, confronting non-state armed groups as a threat to international security and stability. Second, addressing climate change and its effects. Third, tackling regional challenges, particularly in the Middle East and Africa. The role of non-state armed groups that threaten the security and stability of states has grown considerably. Indeed, they now seek to control maritime corridors and straits and to threaten freedom of navigation. They also target facilities in a number of countries. At the global level, more than 200 million people live in areas under the control of armed groups or in contested areas. Moreover, more than 130 non-state armed groups have been identified as legally classified parties to armed conflicts. These figures clearly reflect the scale of the spread and proliferation of these groups in a world that over the past two decades has become less secure and less stable. Further, the close links between these armed groups and separatist militias on the one hand and terrorist organizations and criminal networks as well as mercenary elements on the other hand are evident to all. It is therefore a mistake to believe that some of these groups are peaceful or constructive or that they can engage in the settlement of conflicts. these groups use violence to impose a fait accompli and to serve the agenda of those who control them. They must therefore be dealt with firmly, and responsibility must be assigned to the states that sponsor, harbor, finance, and arm them, and provide them with safe haven and support. The responsibility of these sponsoring states is not merely political. It is also legal, moral, and historical. These groups and their sponsors alike cannot be allowed to become a means of evading responsibility or a tool for carrying out what states cannot do directly. Hence, deterrent sanctions must be imposed on these groups and their sponsors, All those who provide them with support, financing, or arms must be held accountable. Mr. President, there can be no way to sustain peace and development without effectively addressing the challenge of climate change, which is no longer a future threat. It is already affecting water and food security, as well as the stability of territories, economies, and the living conditions of populations. Despite its limited contribution to greenhouse gas emissions, Morocco remains among the countries most vulnerable to the impact of climate change. Accordingly, in line with the vision of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God assist him, the Kingdom has adopted a proactive policy based on the continued construction of dams, the interconnection of water basins, seawater desalination, the reuse of treated wastewater, and the rationalization of water resource management, particularly in the agricultural sector. This national effort forms part of an international commitment to climate action. On that basis, the Kingdom has set for the period 2026-2035 a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by up to 53% by 2035, while placing adaptation and the strengthening of territorial resilience at the top of its priorities. This effort has extended to the African continent, which suffers from the devastating effects of climate change. The Royal Initiative to establish three African Climate Commissions for the Congo Basin, the Sahel region, and the African island states has generated promising momentum to strengthen African climate action and coordination among the states of the continent in addressing these challenges. However, addressing climate change cannot rely on national effort alone. It requires the provision of affordable and accessible financing, technology transfer, and genuine international solidarity, enabling developing countries to fulfill their responsibilities towards present and future generations alike. Mr. President, Madam President, the Palestinian question remains a constant priority in the foreign policy of the Kingdom of Morocco based on its belief in the justice of this, that this is a just cause and it's central to achieving peace and stability in the Middle East region. Building on this conviction, the Kingdom of Morocco, under the leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, believes that the establishment of a lasting peace in the Middle East depends on the establishment of an independent, sovereign, and viable Palestinian state on the borders of the 4th of June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with the State of Israel in peace and security. In the face of the tragedy that the brotherly Palestinian people continue to endure, the Kingdom renews its call for respect for the ceasefire in Gaza and for the entry of humanitarian assistance into the Strip in sufficient quantities without impediment or interruption. At the same time, Morocco stresses the need to support the Palestinian Authority, particularly in the financial, technical, structural, humanitarian and training fields. and to accompany the reforms it is undertaking within its various institutions. Morocco also renews its support for the pivotal role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Onroa. In keeping with its approach of supporting initiatives aimed at achieving peace in the Middle East, Morocco has decided to participate in the International Stabilization Force in Gaza and to contribute through humanitarian and security initiatives to establishing a climate of peace and security in the region by contributing to the training of the Palestinian police, deploying high-ranking military officers to the internal security forces, and setting up a military field hospital in addition to its readiness to lead a program to counter extremism. Developments in the West Bank are deeply alarming. including the adoption of certain laws that affect the legal status of the Palestinian territory and pave the way for their seizure for the purpose of settlement expansion, as well as the systematic violence perpetrated by Israeli settlers against Palestinian citizens. All these measures point in one direction, the displacement of the population and the undermining of the material basis for the establishment of an independent Palestinian state. With regard to the city of Jerusalem, Morocco expresses its deep concern about unilateral Israeli measures and the repeated violations of the sanctity of Al-Aqsa Mosque, which constitutes serious transgressions that contribute to fueling the discourse of extremism and hatred at the expense of the voice of wisdom and moderation. As the chair of Al-Quds Committee, His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God assist him, continues his work to preserve the historical, cultural, and spiritual identity of the holy city and its legal status, as well as to improve the living conditions of the Magdisi inhabitants, combining political and diplomatic action with programs implemented on the ground by Bayt al-Mal Al-Quds al-Sharif Agency, the executive arm of Al-Quds Committee. Mr. President, despite its significant human, natural, and civilizational assets, The African continent faces a gap between the scale of the commitments announced for its benefit by the international community and the value of what has actually been achieved on the ground. Contrary to the stereotypical image held by some, Africa is not a continent of conflicts and a hotbed of problems. Rather, it is a land of opportunity and potential, capable of devising solutions and putting forward initiatives. That is the idea summed up by His Majesty King Mohammed VI. May God assist him in his eloquent words. Africa must trust Africa, end of quote. The enlightened royal vision for Africa, which has materialized through a significant number of projects, stems from a firm conviction that the continent has attained a level of maturity that qualifies it to participate effectively in all decisions relating to its affairs. Indeed, it is capable of contributing to formulating proposals and solutions to the challenges facing the world as a whole. Morocco has translated this vision into practical and tangible royal initiatives, the most prominent of which are perhaps the royal initiative to enable Sahel states to access the Atlantic Ocean, as well as the African Atlantic States process, the African Atlantic Gas Backline Project, as well as investments in regional infrastructure, cooperation in the areas of food security, fertilizer production, and training programs for African executives. This is in addition to partnerships in the areas of health, renewable energy, and water resource management. Madam President, with regard to the North African region, thanks to the momentum initiated by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God assist him. The question of the Moroccan Sahara reached a historic turning point with the adoption by the Security Council of Resolution 2797 last October. Since then, this regional dispute has embarked on an irreversible course, breaking with the past and looking to the future with a view to its final settlement. This track rests on principles and parameters that admit no interpretation nor any reading between the lines or in the margins as some are vainly attempting deluding themselves in flagrant denial of reality and total disregard for established truth. These principles as set forth in the Security Council resolution are as follows. First, there is no solution outside the framework of the autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty. Second, there is no approach or mechanism other than the political negotiation process under the auspices of the United Nations and on a sole basis, namely the autonomy initiative presented by the Kingdom of Morocco. Third, there can be no discussion or dispute regarding the responsibility and obligations of the four parties clearly identified by Security Council Resolution 2797. Fourth, there will be no maintaining of the status quo preferred by the other parties. The train of political solution has already departed. Fifth, there is no credibility for interlocutors who violate the ceasefire and refuse to respect Security Council Resolutions. Sixth and last, there can be no tolerance for the continued holding of the population of the camps as hostages for a half a century in flagrant violation of international law and international humanitarian law. Alongside with its firm commitment to the final settlement of this regional dispute, affected regional dispute, the Kingdom of Morocco steadfastly continues to drive social and economic development in its southern provinces, particularly in areas of infrastructure, university education, health sector, and airports, among others. It is a fortunate coincidence that tomorrow, God willing, the inhabitants of these Saharan provinces will fulfill their national and political duty by participating, as they have always done in the past, in the legislative elections of the Kingdom. In so doing, they will strengthen democratic representation and contribute to the day-to-day management of the needs of the inhabitants of the Moroccan provinces. Madam President, the Kingdom of Morocco, true to its constant approach, is determined to contribute effectively and responsibly to the maintenance of international peace and security. This is done in accordance with a realistic vision of international cooperation grounded in solidarity and with full respect for international law, national sovereignty, and territorial integrity. It is in this context that the Kingdom of Morocco has presented its candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the term 2028-2029, so that it may continue to serve peace, collective security, and multilateralism with full respect for the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It is the candidacy of a kingdom with a diplomatic heritage spanning several centuries, which carries the vision of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, may God assist him, as an anchor for stability and sustainable development in the world. This candidacy also reflects the continued contribution of the Kingdom of Morocco to the three pillars of the United Nations, namely peace, development, and the rule of law. I thank you. I thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Cooperation, and Moroccans Abroad of Morocco.
