I now give the floor to His Excellency, Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali. Thank you. Right here. Thank you. Mr. President of the General Assembly, Your Excellencies, President Trump, heads of states and governments, Mr. Secretary-General, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great honor for me to address this august Assembly on behalf of His Excellency General Asimigoyta, President of the Transition and Head of State, and to deliver the statement of the Republic of Mali. Mr. President, please allow me to warmly congratulate you on your election as President of the 81st session of the General Assembly. And from the outset, I assure you of Mali's full cooperation throughout your mandate. I also would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor for the remarkable conduct of the work of the 80th session. And finally, I wish to express our sincere appreciation to Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, for his commitment over the past 10 years in the service of our organization and in the service of peace, development, and human rights throughout the world. Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. Exactly 66 years ago, six days only after becoming independent and sovereign, Ali, under the leadership of President Modi Bo Keta, was admitted to the UN with the support of the Republic of Tunisia and of the Salon, currently Sri Lanka. We welcome the theme of the 81st session of the General Assembly, namely, Restoring Trust, Transformation, a United Nations organization that delivers for all. This theme is very timely and relevant because beyond encouraging reflection on how our organization can regain credibility and effectiveness amid multiple crises and challenges to multilateralism, It especially calls on member states to restore trust and seek common solutions to the many challenges of our time. And how can this be achieved? For its part, Mali reaffirms its unwavering commitment to reformed multilateralism, founded on strict respect for the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, particularly sovereign equality, territorial integrity non-use of force mutual respect and non-interference in the internal affairs of a state the further we move away from these principles the closer we come to cycles of conflict and we all know that the blatant violations of international law Its selective application, double standards in the management of crises throughout the world, abusive recourse to force and threats, and policies of hegemony and domination in violation of the charter of this organization have seriously undermined public confidence throughout the world. in international institutions, especially the United Nations. We therefore call for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures which undermine state sovereignty and endanger the well-being of populations in approximately 30 countries throughout the world which are affected by such sanctions. To these practices, which undermine the current governance, we need to add the slowness of anticipation within the United Nations, which too often leaves the organization reduced to observing crises after they have erupted. That's the case in Israel, where for several decades we had a security crisis, also the crisis in Libya, provoked by the NATO interference in 2011. The NATO action in Libya significantly worsened the security, political, humanitarian, and human rights situation in our region through, in particular, the spread of terrorism and violent extremism. Now, faced with this reality, it is legitimate to question the effectiveness of the tools available to our organization. It is for this reason that we welcome the strategic review of the United Nations Regional Office for West Africa and the Sahel, which should lead to an approach better aligned with the realities and concerns of the people impacted. The government of Mali reiterates its strong condemnation of international terrorism and its foreign state sponsors, who finance ARM, provide logistical support and intelligence to this organized transnational crime. Ukraine's initial statement in 2024, in which it acknowledged support for terrorist groups operating in the Sahel, that country publicly reiterated the highest level of state is interference in Africa. And beyond our states, other independent sources also corroborate these unacceptable actions by Ukraine. Here we have a country which claims to be protecting its territorial integrity, whereas in Africa, in the Sahel, it provides clear support to terrorist groups and other harmful groups which undermine the territorial integrity of our countries. In our history, the international community, in particular Africa, cannot just remain silent in the face of what was being done by Ukraine. It has enormous consequences for African countries, and it goes beyond that. We understand very well that Ukraine is just a visible part of the iceberg which is trying to destabilize our country, to break our determination to throw off the colonial yoke. terrorism which is nurtured and supported from outside does it in three ways first in the armed way we know that it's attacking civilian populations it's a security crisis in the economic way which impacts our countries and through the media notably through organized and systematic disinformation campaigns and certain media outlets nostalgic for colonial past play a role in these. The coordinated attacks of 25th April and 4th July 2026 in several locations in Mali caused numerous casualties and they demonstrate the existence of the dangerous connection that we become increasingly aware of. So the scenario we witnessed in 2012 is repeating itself now, with terrorist groups and so-called separatist armed groups now forming an openly terrorist coalition against Malia institutions and populations. regional and international responses, including the deployment of international forces, have failed to halt these complex security crises and massacres affecting the Sahelian populations. And that is why His Excellency Ibrahim Taur of Burkina Faso and President of the Confederation of Sahel States, General Asimek Goita, President of Transition and Head of State of Mali, General Abdurrahman Tiani, President of the Republic of Niger and Head of State. Our three heads of state took the historic decision on 6 July 2024 in Yameh to create the Confederation of Sahel States, so said to take responsibility for the fate of our nations. And since its establishment to date, the AES Confederation has achieved real and encouraging progress in various areas. I reaffirm here the determination of our three heads of state to pursue and intensify the fight against terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations. The Mali delegation fully endorses that statement that will be delivered by his act, Mr. Traore, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, on behalf of the Confederation of Sahel States, which brings together Burkina Faso, the Republic of Mali, and the Republic of Niger. Malian forces on their own and also within the AES Unified Force and with the support of the Russian Federation are today on the front line against imposed terrorism. I would even go so far as to say it's a hybrid war by proxy whose implications extend beyond our region. I also salute all partners who continue to support Mali and the countries of the Sahel in this difficult context. Victory against terrorism, this global existential threat, requires pooling efforts and resources, but above all, it requires a shared understanding of the phenomenon of terrorism itself, Because contrary to what some would have us believe, there is no such thing as a good terrorist and a bad terrorist. The three AES member countries remain open to cooperation with all partners who respect our main principles governing our countries, namely respect for our sovereignty, territorial integrity, the respect for our strategic choices, including our choices for partnership, and also taking into account the interests of our populations. And we do not accept dictates here. Rather, we seek sincere and healthy cooperation and partnership conducted in mutual respect. And in this spirit, Mali, in line with the principles and goals of its policy, will continue to conduct its diplomacy on the basis of good neighborly relations, mutual respect, non-interference in the domestic affairs of other states, and the peaceful settlement of disputes. I would like to use this opportunity to pay tribute to all victims of the cowardly barbarism of terrorism who have sacrificed their lives. I also would like to pay tribute to our defense and security forces for their courage, their professionalism, and their unwavering dedication in defending sovereignty, territorial integrity of our countries, and in protecting our people. I pay special tribute to the memory of the General Sadio Kamara, Minister of Defense and Veterans Affairs, whose legacy of patriotism, courage, and sacrifice will continue to inspire future generations of Malians and people in the Sahel. Mr. President, to reinforce security and ensure the sustainable return of peace, the government is implementing a comprehensive and integrated strategy for stability and prosperity of our country. And for this, the State continues to extend a hand to all those willing to lay down their arms and return to the Republic in line with the conclusions of Inter-Mali and Dialogue on the National Charter for Peace and Reconciliation. Already thousands of former combatants who meet the conditions have either joined the Defense and Security Forces or entered civilian employment. Mali's sovereignty is very precious to us and it is not negotiable. is not limited to defending our territory. It also means we are controlling our economic choices, that we are managing and developing our natural resources, mining resources, our gold and lithium, strengthening our productive sectors, and also creating greater opportunities for our youth. And in this spirit, the government remains committed to implementing the Malikura 2063 vision and the National Strategy for Emergence and Sustainable Development 2024-2033. These two ambitious programs are designed to meet the illegitimate aspirations of the Somalian people, and they constitute a generational pact, and it shows our determination to build a sovereign state, a competitive economy, a just society, a country in which every citizen can thrive with dignity. The government placed at the heart of its action economic recovery and public welfare because they are essential to lasting peace and stability. Thus, through appropriate reforms, the government, in addition to improving political situation, we've improved economic governance, including better management of public affairs and greater domestic resource mobilization. My country today, I must say, works very hard to mobilize the resources that we need because the international assistance on its own, however great it is, never developed a country. If we looked today at the level of international assistance and we compare that with the needs for financing in our countries, places where millions of young people arrive at the labor market in Mali, in Burkina Faso, in Niger, and in Africa, we can see that the international assistance will never be enough and we need to mobilize our own resources and we need to have confidence that we will be able to have other sources of funding so that our country can move forward. So our countries will continue counting on their own whilst leaving the door open who want to work with us. Public spending is increasingly directed today towards structuring productive investment, better access to basic services and training and employment for young people and women in particular. And this ambition requires greater local processing of our natural and mining resources, stronger national production capacities, and an active role for youth in Mali's economic and social transformation. Mali intends to continue its national re-foundation to guarantee security, justice, well-being, and prosperity for all of its citizens. And once again, we count first and foremost on ourselves in this. Mr. President, now, regional and international issues. The government remains attentive to developments across Africa and around the world, and we encourage, therefore, efforts aimed at the rapid and lasting resolution of conflicts on the African continent. Regarding the situation in the Middle East, Mali reaffirms its full support for the brotherly Palatinean people and their legitimate struggle to exist as a fully recognized state. Mr. President, the international situation is such that we have to acknowledge the international order is undergoing profound change. And the longer we ignore it, the less we will be able to adjust to it. The question is no longer whether the world is moving towards multipolarity, but rather which actors will shape this new order and how will they cooperate to meet the aspirations of people throughout the planet we share. And here we're talking about cooperation, not confrontation, and not the law of the strongest to govern the world. In this changing environment, Mali will pursue a foreign policy based on sovereign equality of states, on diversified partnerships, on defense of national interests, and constructive engagement for peace and prosperity throughout the world. Our objective here is strategic autonomy for Mali, strategic autonomy for the Confederation of the Sahel States, strategic autonomy for Africa in both security and development areas. And this autonomy does not mean a rupture. Rather, it seeks to make Africa into a credible and indispensable partner for global stability and prosperity. Climate change and desertification for Mali and the Sahel remain a major source of economic, social, environmental vulnerability. They affect agriculture and livelihoods. They also, we have to acknowledge it, are threatening peace and security. We therefore call on member states to focus on adaptation, on access to climate finance, on indigenous technologies and solutions tailored to Sahelian realities. We advocate stronger links between efforts to combat desertification, food security initiatives, water management, conflict prevention, and resilience building. Mr. President, the world is experiencing extraordinary technological advances, including generative artificial intelligence. It is something that comes up in debate after debate. AI offers enormous opportunities, and we acknowledge it, but also significant risks. We must be lucid here. We must not simply consume AI technology. We must master it, adapt it to our realities, and contribute to its development. This requires defining and creating appropriate legal and ethical frameworks. For us, digital and technological sovereignty has become an essential dimension of national sovereignty. We must invest in skills, in research, in innovation, in infrastructure, so that young people can participate fully in this transformation. For this reason, the head of state of the Republic of Mali, Asimi Guota, has established Mali's Center for Artificial Intelligence Robotics to promote our country's digital sovereignty. On the issue of international migration, Mali, which is a country of origin, transit and destination at the same time, Mali therefore reaffirms its attachment to international cooperation and considers human mobility is a benefit for humanity. It is important in this room to say it, to repeat it, that for us, human mobility is not a threat. It is a benefit, and all of the countries in this assembly have benefited from migration, even though other aspects need to be managed. So, migration mobility is a benefit for humanity. We call, therefore, for respect of the rights of the migrants in accordance with international conventions. Mr. President, by way of conclusion, Mali recalls that the multi-arital framework, which is embodied by the United Nations, stands at a crossroads. The time has come for us to assume our shared responsibility for a reformed United Nations, refounded, I was going to say, that's how vast the scope of work is, a United Nations that is more just, more representative, and truly the service of all of the people in the world without distinction. This is an essential condition to restoring the trust of member states and people in the organization. It requires strengthening representation within multilateral institutions, including multilateral financial institutions, and ensuring that Africa's voice is heard more clearly in decision-making bodies which affect the future of our world, the future of humankind. Mali reaffirms its readiness to contribute to common efforts of the international community for a world which is more peaceful, more secure, more just, more prosperous, and finally, more united. I thank you. I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
