The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Robert Abela, Prime Minister of the Republic of Malta. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates, Dear Friends, The chosen theme for this year's General Assembly is restoring trust, managing transformation. I don't think that there could be a more appropriate framing for our discussions of this week. Trust, or more properly, the lack thereof, is the greatest challenge currently facing our world. The erosion of trust that has gripped our societies runs deep. where once people embraced trust, now people are gripped by suspicion. Suspicion of governments, suspicion of institutions, suspicion of businesses, even, all too often, suspicion of each other. I am talking about suspicion, not skepticism. Skepticism, the legitimate questioning of those who hold power over people's lives, is the lifeblood of a democratic society. suspicion however the assumption that others are automatically looking out for their interests and not those of the common good is poison to any democratic society no community can succeed if we blindly believe that our neighbors are out to do us down just as no country can succeed if it blindly believes that its neighbors, even those it may long have considered and seen as friends, are out to get it. Which means restoring trust, rebuilding alliances, remaking friendships must be the central mission for all of us here, at home and abroad. It must also be the central mission of the remaking of this United Nations. To change, you have to believe. We know we need to change how the United Nations works, how it takes decisions, and how it delivers on the ground. But we can only make that change, achieve that transformation, if we believe that change is possible. Nobody ever successfully renovated a house without the faith that however hard the work, however many setbacks faced along the way, the end result would be a real improvement on what went before. So, we need to show faith that however hard the work, however many setbacks faced along the way, the end result of transforming this house, this home of all the nations, will be a real step forward. And as this United Nations embarks on its ninth decade of service, the need for a step change in how the international community works together, solves problems together, is arguably needed more acutely now than ever before. that erosion of trust is leading to the corrosion of the international order. Not the improvement of the international order, but the destruction of the international order. An international order that, for all its flaws and failures, has seen more children escape hunger, More families live in peace and more children grow into old age than any era before it. To destroy the international settlement without any idea of what comes next would be an act of wanting destruction that would rightly never be forgiven or forgotten by the tens of millions whose future it would betray. So, let us be bold and let us say it loud and clear. Let us be utterly unequivocal. Now, more than ever, is a moment for more cooperation, not less. More dialogue, not less. More trust, not less. That is the only way that we will manage to find paths to progress on the all too many, all true, all too intractable conflicts blighting our world today. In Malta, the smallest member state of the European Union, we have always been a bridge between Europe and the Middle East. So allow me to focus on two of those conflicts on our doorstep. Firstly, Ukraine. It is all too easy and all too great a mistake for us to fall in the trap that repelling the invasion of Ukraine becomes another never-ending conflict. a grinding tragedy on the corner of our continent about which we can do nothing. Malta will never accept that despair. Europe must never accept that despair. The world must never turn its head away in despair. Malta remains a sentiment in our condemnation of that invasion today as we were on day one in February 2022. And Malta is equally as adamant that a just and lasting peace must guarantee Ukraine's sovereignty within its internationally recognized borders. That will only come about through a diplomatic process that the Ukrainian people can have full trust in. They will only have such trust if the process follows a full and unconditional ceasefire and the full participation of Ukraine and its people in the subsequent peace talks. rightly the Ukrainian people will never have trust in any search for a settlement which involves their government being frog-marged to the table one arm tied behind its back whilst the guns still blaze the issue of trust is clearly also central to the very worrying situation in Gaza. The people of Israel need to have trust that Hamas will be disarmed and that they will play no future role in the governance or security structures of Gaza. But the people of Gaza need to have trust that there is a path to a just peace. It is impossible to build that trust with a humanitarian situation as acute as that being experienced in Gaza right now. Malta's voice remains unwaveringly with the global calls for safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access throughout Gaza in accordance with international law. We firmly believe that the Gaza peace plan provides the best path towards ending the conflict and advancing credible political progress. To achieve that progress, all parties, and I emphasize all parties, must fully respect and implement the objectives and commitments set out in the plan. and naturally no progress can be made if there is any question of the forced displacement of any of the Palestinian population. Indeed it is incumbent on each and every one of us in the international community to rebuild the trust needed to underpin the conditions where genuine in progress can be made towards a negotiated and lasting two-state solution. That is the only solution. Nobody, however, is under any illusion how out of reach, unfortunately, that seems at the moment. But nor is this the moment to shy away or run away from the only goal that will guarantee the people of Israel and Palestine living side by side with the peace, prosperity and stability that they both deserve. Sadly, a progress towards a long-term solution is being endangered by the situation in the West Bank. settlement expansion running directly counter to the resolutions of this General Assembly and designed to undermine the Palestinian territorial integrity must stop and stop now. So too must the violent settler attacks on Palestinian communities increasing at an alarming rate be halted. They must be halted. These are all essential preconditions to a just and lasting peace, as is a credible and reformed Palestinian authority that can demonstrate to citizens of both Palestine and Israel that it has the transparency, the accountability, the institutional effectiveness, and above all the democratic legitimacy to be a truly effective partner for peace. Malta stands ready to play its part in building the capacity of both a renewed democratic Palestinian authority and the robust civil society that must underpin it. Not just in Ukraine, Gaza and Israel but across the world be it the conflict in Sudan the ongoing violence in Myanmar or the instability across the Sahel it is evident that diminished trust means diminished chances of finding solutions you could put it as starkly as no trust equals no peace of course no matter the conflict, each with its own individual and particular circumstances. There is no easy way of building trust. But equally, there is no easy way of avoiding the need to build trust. We all know from our lives, as much as from the experiences of our own countries, just how hard it is to rebuild trust when it has evaporated. yet we also know the consequences if we give up trying and the rewards that can come if however slowly and however tentatively we can start if it is hard enough to build trust human to human face to face it can be of course infinitely harder to build trust of machines of the technology shaping all our lives. Yet, the challenge of how we can manage to trust the technology and the organizations behind it is rapidly becoming the most pressing challenge of our age. The sheer spread and the sheer power, the sheer speed of artificial intelligence is mind-blowing. It appears to be moving far too fast for anybody, let alone governments, to manage to keep pace. It can seem, whether from the perspective of a leader, consumer, or parent, to be overwhelming. There is no escaping that this is the biggest change and the biggest challenge that any of us will experience in our lifetime. So much so that we barely have the words to describe how monumental a disruption it is proving to be. The usual phrases, step change, paradigm shift, just don't seem to capture the scale. And we should also be under no illusion that the currently existing rules, the traditional models of governance are in any way or manner up to grappling with the revolution that we are living through. Which is why if we stand any chance of helping to build citizens' trust in these advanced technologies, we need to begin by being honest and transparent that governments, just as individuals, we are still finding our way. that we don't have all the answers. What we do have, what we must have, is the will and determination to act and the right values to underpin those actions. And of course, it almost goes without saying that no state, however micro or mighty, has any chance of getting a grip if they try to go it alone. We only stand a chance as humanity on getting a grip on technology that seeks to ape our humanity if we collectively work together, acknowledging that the rules need to be set globally and they need to be stuck to even as they develop, as the tech develops. If we are to stand any chance of securing public confidence that AI can enhance and not destroy humanity, we need a set of international rules that reflect international law. So Malta, my country, wholeheartedly supports the implementation of the Global Digital Compact and wider UN efforts to strengthen international digital cooperation. To fragment is to fail. And that applies equally to fighting the new threats from the new front line in global conflict and disruption. Cyber attacks, attacks on critical infrastructure, disinformation, the cutting of the underwater cables that connect us all to each other. These are not theoretical threats. They are constant and existential threats. For a small nation like Malta, a small island in the Mediterranean, that relies on our connections to the rest of the world, they are, yes, existential threats. Tackling them must be a priority, the priority for these United Nations. We need to embrace every emerging technology that can help us fend off those threats and build our digital resilience. Today, the guardians of our democracy, of our freedoms, are just as likely to be found coding at a keyboard as marching in uniform. Both must work in lockstep together. Security will always, of course, be physical, yes. But now it must also be digital. That change must then be reflected in the way we work together to achieve our different and common goals. I know that I am preaching to true believers, Mr. President and Mr. Secretary General, when I say that there must be no let-up, no slowing down, in the relentless drive for reform of how this United Nations and its agencies does its business and delivers its services. To take our foot off the gas would be to let down the millions who need this United Nations to do better, be better at tackling the problems that blight their lives. That is why the goal of this General Assembly, a United Nations that delivers for all, is so important and so urgent. If we are to have any hope of renewing the trust of the citizens we serve in global institutions and the global order, we have to show that those institutions, this institution, can indeed deliver. delivered in ways that change tangibly lives for the better. We must never lose sight and never lose faith in the values that brought us together in the first place as nations united. Malta is and always, of course, will be a passionate advocate and promoter of and passionately committed to multilateralism. At the core of all we do must be the code and conscience of the founding charter of these United Nations. But the implementation of those values, the way we turn those fine words into fine actions, must always be a process of constant evolution. We can never stand still if we are to keep cooperation alive. So Malta remains thoroughly committed to the implementation of the Pact for the Future and all of its associated actions. Reforms must, yes, remain member state driven and firmly anchored in the intergovernmental process. And efficiency must not come at the expense of effectiveness on the ground. Malta solidly backs a strong and effective resident coordinator system as the key anchor of UN action at a country level. And I can't reiterate often enough or restate strongly enough that the only effective antidote to the cancer of cynicism and suspicion is effective and concerted action to tackle the greatest threat to our people and our planet. and alongside spreading conflict and the dangers of uncontrolled technology, the greatest threat to us all and especially island nations like Malta is man-made climate change. I say and I express this to all of you, just look at the weather extremes we have been experiencing in Europe, particularly during these last weeks. To do nothing, to stand by and just wash our hands of it would be a moral and practical betrayal of the citizens, of the millions of citizens who put their faith in us that we won't flinch from the biggest problems and the toughest solutions and decisions needed to tackle them. So we must not stand by. We must stand firm, stand firm against the torrent of disinformation that fuels the deniers. Stand firm against the vested interests that seek to block effective action. Stand firm against the naysayers who say that because all don't choose to act, nobody should. To those cynics, I want to point out an instance that shows how hope can triumph over defeatism. And I go back to 1967 when representing the then geographically smallest member state of the United Nations, a member state that had been a member of the United Nations for less than three years, Arvid Pardo spoke up in this General Assembly. In a staring speech, Malta's permanent representative made a passionate plea to the world's common humanity. He may have been speaking on behalf of a very small nation, but he had a very ambitious vision. Pardot called for the world to treat the resources of the oceans beyond their own borders as the common heritage of mankind. His demand for a law of the sea was prescient, but to achieve it took persistence. In fact, it took 27 years before UNCLOS came into being. What motivated Malta's action then is what motivates Malta's demands now. doing nothing meant leaving the world's oceans to the mercy of the world's biggest, strongest and richest nations. Taking action showed that, and I quote, they belonged to all of humanity, those living and those who still had to be born. That spirit was evident when in 1988, right at the start of the concern about global warming, Malta proposed the United Nations General Assembly resolution that recognized climate change as a global problem requiring collective and global solutions. suspicion of collective action won't be counteracted by retreat it will only be overcome by the strength to turn convictions into action the phrase dare to dream has become perhaps the world's most common motivational phrase imploring us that all we have to do is have the courage to dream and those dreams will almost automatically become reality. And yes, we should all indeed dare to dream, to inspire ourselves, to turn hope into achievement. But to turn initial aspirations into sustainable attainment takes something more than just dreams. It takes trust. trust that by working together we achieve more than we could ever achieve alone. It is that belief in the power of trust which underpins the values that brought me into public life. It is that belief in the power of trust even now when it can seem a commodity in all too short supply that convinces me that ultimately it, trust, will prevail. That ultimately we, as a world, will find the courage to dial down the disbelief and crank up the confidence. If we don't, if we don't realize that mutual suspicion can only lead to mutual destruction, if we don't realize that closing our minds to those who don't share our worldview limits, our chances of solving the world's biggest problems, if we don't realize that limiting dialogue only to those who are like-minded in reality can only drive us further apart, we face a very bleak future indeed. I refuse. Malta refuses to believe that such a future is any more inevitable than it is desirable. There is only one simple antidote to the destructive power of suspicion. It is one that may not, as of yet, have appeared on many motivational bumper stickers. But it is one that must be our lodestar. So I say to my fellow leaders, as much as I say to my fellow citizens of this planet, let us dare to trust, dare to realize that even those who we disagree with the most must become a part of the solution and not a prolonger of pain. Thank you very much. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of the Republic of Malta.
