And the Assembly will hear now an address by Her Excellency Netumbo Nandi Daitwa, President of the Republic of Namibia. I request the protocol to escort Her Excellency and invite her to address the Assembly. Your Excellency, President of the General Assembly, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election as the president of the eighth session of the General Assembly. I also thank the president of the eighth session of the General Assembly for her commendable leadership. Mr. President, confidence in the international system is increasingly declining. International organizations are grappling with reduced capacity. Political and economic impunity is being entrenched. The UN Charter underscores resolving international dispute through peaceful means and the obligation of state to pursue diplomatic solution before resorting to escalation or the use of force. Notwithstanding, we continue to be intended with image of suffering of innocent civilians, such as in Sudan and eastern DRC, larger-scale internal displacement, cross-border migration, and humanitarian crisis across the world. Those conflicts continue to undermine international mechanism and structures established to maintain international peace and security. Hence, we commend you, Mr. President, for the timely and befitting theme of the eighth first session of the UN General Assembly, namely, restoring trust, managing transformation, a united nation that delivers for all. Namibia's independence was born out of international solidarity and is renowned as a UN success story. This is a testimony to the effectiveness of the UN. Therefore, we shall not be passive observers to the efforts aimed at dismantling or weakening the international system that had served us over eight years, albeit with some shortcomings. In this regard, we shall continue to call for peace over conflict, dialogue over confrontation, and peaceful coexistence over tension. In restoring trust, we need to manage transformation of the United Nations Security Council based on equitable representation in its decision-making process to reflect contemporary geopolitical realities. the common African position as articulated in the Azurwine Consensus and the CERTA Declaration has also been reaffirmed in the Pact for the Future, which recognizes Africa as a special case. The time has come for us to recognize that we have been negotiating for too long. and that it is because of those problems that a rule to trust in the United Nations. This fairness and justice should extend to the participation of women in decision-making, including in the prevention and resolution of conflict, post-conflict reconstruction and peace building, in line with the UN Security Council, Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security. The Women, Peace and Security agenda has contributed positively positively to the rehabilitation, reconciliation and reintegration efforts in conflict-affected regions, serving as a core framework for stabilizing post-conflict situations. This is a positive undertaking which should be emulated by other international and regional organizations and non-governmental organizations that are involved in peace support operation and peace building efforts. Mr. President, any system needs constant transformation to be effective as we forge ahead with the SDGs, Reform of the United International Financial Architecture, is critical to a more equitable and inclusive global economic order. Such reforms should create greater policy space and access to financing to enable countries to expand their economies through value addition to their natural resources, including critical minerals, for our people to have full benefit of our resources. This will accelerate sustainable development, address inequality, create jobs for our youth, and lift our population out of poverty. poverty. In this context, we welcome the creation of the African Credit Rating Agency to be launched in Mauritius in October this year. This development is a building block of Africa taking ownership of her development and prosperity agenda. It demonstrates progress in Africa's ambitions to drive impetus for the reform of the international financial architecture in order to ensure a level playing field. Middle-income countries continue to face high borrowing costs, limited fiscal space, debt vulnerabilities, climate-related shocks, and persistent inequality. Namibia reaffirms the Sevilla commitment as an important step towards reforming the international financial architecture and strengthening the global partnership for sustainable development. The system must thus become more inclusive, equitable, and responsive to the realities of the middle-income countries. Mr. President, the world is experiencing increasing devastating floods, heat waves, frequent hulkans, and prolonged period of drought. At times, it feels that we are at a war with Mother Nature. At this point, Namibia reiterates its solidarity with the government and people of Nepal following the recent flood in that country. Namibia continues to face significant climatic changes as a result of climate change, including recurring droughts, rising temperatures, and growing pressure on agriculture and water resources. Yet Namibia contributes less than 0.01 percent of the global greenhouse gas emission, and it bears disproportionate share of the impact of climate change like other developing countries. In the spirit of climate justice, we call for a greater responsibility by those who have contributed the most to the global greenhouse gas emission, including through increased support for countries that are most vulnerable to climate impact. It is through sustainable climate financing that we will be able to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 13 to combat climate change. Against this backdrop, it is very important to focus on water in 2026, particularly as as climate change intensifies drought, floods, desiccation, and land degradation across Africa. As an arid country, Namibia continues to promote the prudent use and conservation of water, integrated water resource management, groundwater recharge, and greater investment in sustainable water infrastructure. We also underscore the importance of the implementation of the NAMIB Declaration adopted at COP11 in Windhoek as part of our collective response to desertification and land degradation and drought. In this regard, we are pleased to inform that Namibia is a host to the Global Water Partnership headquarters, first a time to be located in the Global South. In our capacity as co-chair with Senegal of the AU International High-Level Panel on the African Water Investment Program, on Monday we convened a high-level side event on water investment for Africa and the globe. We believe its outcome is a meaningful contribution to the 2026 UN Water Conference to be held later in the year, and advance strong global partnership, investment and action for sustainable water security. Mr. President, the Pact for the Future, which was co-facilitated by Namibian Germany, provides an ambitious framework for transforming global governance and addressing contemporary and emerging challenges. While the Pact gives due consideration for the interests and the needs of the future generation, its implementation has not been as effective as we had wished. For Namibia, effective implementation of the key commitment of the PEC for the Future would be beneficial in accomplishing Namibia's national priorities, namely agriculture, sports, youth empowerment, quality education and training, creative industry, health and social welfare, land, housing, and sanitation. I wish to urge all member states to consider the implementation of the PEC for the Future as a critical international priority for development. As part of our developmental agenda, we are preparing our young people for the emerging industries in Namibia, such as oil and gas, renewable energy, and green hydrogen, among others. Subsequently, this year we have introduced 100% subsidized registration and tuition fees for Namibian students entering universities and vocational training centers and encourage them to take up appropriate courses. The government of Namibia has established the National Youth Development Fund last year. As a result of this fund, young people have set up their own medical practice, law firms, milling plants, pottery business, to mention a few, thus contributing to job creation and poverty eradication. Namibia also takes cognizant of the rapid advancement of artificial intelligence in advancing human progress in line with the global digital compact. However, we call for ethical, responsible, inclusive, and human-centered development and use of artificial intelligence with appropriate safeguards to ensure that technological advancement complements and enhances human capability rather than undermine it. A united nation that delivers for all must be inclusive. I reaffirm Namibia's unwavering solidarity with people denied their right to self-determination. This position is firmly rooted in Namibia's historical experience of the brutality and colonialism, apartheid, and occupation. This is not a position born out of antagonism, but rather one grounded in Namibia's longstanding commitment to justice, solidarity, and the rights of the peoples to determine their own destiny, in accordance with the UN General Assembly Resolution 1514 of 1960. The United Nations has a responsibility to advance a just and lasting resolution of the question of Western Sahara, constant with the charter of the United Nations and the relevant resolution on decolonization and self-determination. We support Mineral's mandate and the holding of a UN-backed referendum in Western Sahara for the Western Sahara people to finally exercise their right to self-determination. We therefore call upon the full implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 2797 of October 2025, which reaffirmed the need for a mutual, agreeable, lasting political solution between the Pulsario and the Kingdom of Morocco. Namibia calls for the Palestine people's right to self-determination, freedom, and statehood. We further call for an end to the atrocities being committed in Gaza. the establishment of an independent Palestinian state living side by side with Israel in peace and security remains a vital goal that we must collectively pursue. We call for the lifting of the unjustified economic embargo against Cuba, which had far-reaching consequences for the Cuban economy and the well-being of its people, including access to essential goods and services. We call for the end to the energy siege on Cuba and her removal from the unilateral list of state allegedly sponsoring terrorism. from the off-going and in the spirit of the Charter for a United Nation that delivers for all, the UN has a responsibility to protect and facilitate the participation of all its members and observers in its work. Mr. President, the adoption of the United Nations Resolution on the transatlantic slave trade in March 2026 is the beginning of a journey. a journey towards truth, acknowledgement, healing, and justice for millions of Africans and people of African descent whose lives were forever changed by slavery, colonialism, and other historical injustice. As we commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Deben Declaration and Program of Action, we are reminded that racial discrimination must not have any place in our societies. And that restorative remedies, including reparation, must be put in place to address those historic injustices. Mr. President Namibia, congratulate the outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterresi, as he nears the end of his tenure. We commend him for overseeing the largest part of the implementation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals that have energized international support, including the actions in the Park for the Future. Namibia stand ready to work with the incoming Secretary General. However, let me point out that since the establishment of the United Nations in 1945, no man has served as Secretary General of the organization. The leadership of the organization has yet to reflect the principle of gender equality which is being promoted across the international system. Namibia therefore believes that it's time that a woman is elected as Secretary General of our organization. Mr. President, the United Nations is the only platform through which all nations can collectively advance shared aspiration, achieve common goals, and address global challenges. Namibia remain a constructive partner in strengthening materialism cooperation in restoring trust in the United Nations. Let us therefore continue to defend our organization. Let us collectively place human dignity at the center of the United Nations so as to restore trust if effectively manage transformation and deliver for all. I thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Namibia.
