And I'll give the floor to His Excellency, Sayyid Badr bin Hamad bin Hamoud al-Abusa'idi, Foreign Minister of Oman. Thank you. Your Excellency, President of the 81st Session of the United Nations General Assembly, the heads and members of delegations, allow me to extend my sincere Congratulations to His Excellency Dr. Kali. al-Rahman on his election to preside over this session, wishing him every success in carrying out his duties. Ladies and gentlemen, dialogue is the truest expression of what binds us together. It is also the optimal way to overcome differences, build trust and understanding, and resolve crises. The Sultanate of Oman will continue its steadfast approach to finding peaceful and consensual solutions to disputes based on the values and principles that help us achieve our shared goals of achieving security and stability for all and advancing economic development projects and prosperity, shared prosperity for our peoples. Refraining from the use of force and interference in the internal affairs of states and being guided instead by the charter of the United Nations and international law and respecting the sovereignty and independence of states, can provide a sound framework that governs international relations and that builds trust and constructive cooperation among states. Distinguished Heads and Members of Delegations, Honourable Delegates. At the beginning of this year, our region witnessed a war that could have been avoided. Subsequent events have shown that the escalation has extended to threaten the security of the countries of the region and paralyze navigation and trade through the vital Strait of Hormuz, affecting energy security, price stability, and confidence in the current international order. The Sultanate of Oman once again reaffirms its steadfast commitment to continuing its efforts aimed at safeguarding navigation in the Strait of Hormuz in accordance with the principles of international law and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. We also call upon all parties to cooperate with Oman in these efforts aimed at safeguarding the interests of all parties relying on transit through the Strait of Hormuz. The Sultanate of Oman renews its solidarity with all neighboring countries, including the member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council. In the legitimate measures they take to maintain their security and protect their sovereignty and territorial integrity. At the same time, we call upon all parties concerned to settle their outstanding disputes through pursuing a policy of self-restraint and foresight, and through engaging in dialogue to reach consensual political solutions and sustainable understandings for the benefit of all. The government of the Sultanate of Oman renews its support for reaching a political solution to the crisis in Yemen one that preserves the unity, stability and territorial integrity of this great country one that meets the aspirations of all components of the brotherly Yemeni people one that puts Yemen on the path of reconstruction, development and prosperity In this context, we renew our call upon all parties to cooperate with one another, to engage positively with one another, to reach a just settlement to this crisis, One that preserves the rights and dignity of the Yemeni people, one that preserves the independence and territorial integrity of Yemen, and one that ensures stable relations with neighboring states in the region. The Sultanate of Oman reaffirms its firm rejection of the ongoing Israeli attacks against numerous Arab states. we also express our condemnation of the crimes of the Israeli occupation and its increasing violations against the Palestinian people which have compounded the suffering of the Palestinian people in its struggle to obtain its legitimate rights and liberate its land within the borders of June 4, 1967, based on the two-state solution and relevant United Nations resolutions. Honorable Delegates, the Sultanate of Oman launched the Moskut plan to counter hate speech genocide atrocity crimes and incitement to atrocity crimes through an initiative inaugurated by His Excellency the Secretary General of the United Nations and with broad international participation here at United Nations headquarters in New York on the 11th of June 2026 Building on this approach, the city of Muscat will host next November, God willing, an event marking the International Day of Tolerance. As part of a path, we hope will lead to further initiatives and partnerships. in cooperation with the international community and the United Nations. Ladies and gentlemen, the Sultanate of Oman attaches great importance to sustainable development and sustainable development goals. we believe that development is indeed an inherent right for all my government continues to implement its development plans and programs within the Oman Vision 2040 we also continue to empower women's active participation and contribution to the development process and decision making women are an integral part of the sustainable development process and should not be viewed solely as a goal of development efforts We therefore allocated 11 permanent and elected seats for women in the Omani Shura Council. In the environmental field, the Sultanate of Oman continues its efforts to implement its national strategy towards transition to a low-carbon economy. through a broad package of projects and initiatives in renewable energy and initiatives in transport, industry and sustainable cities to support national efforts to reach carbon neutrality by 2050. In conclusion, we once again express our gratitude and appreciation to His Excellency Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, for his tireless and courageous efforts to uphold truth and justice in accordance with the United Nations Charter and international law. We affirm once again our support and cooperation with the United Nations to achieve its noble goals and purposes to establish a world that is more secure, more stable, and more prosperous. Thank you, and may the peace, mercy, and blessings of God be upon you. I thank the Foreign Minister of Oman. I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mary-Edith Tassila Yanomoubi, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation in charge of integration.
