I now give the floor to His Excellency Muhyiddin Salim Ahmed Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan. In the name of Allah, the most merciful and gracious, peace and blessings be upon our Prophet and his family and his companions. Your Excellency Mr. Khalil al-Rahman, President of the General Assembly at its 81st session. Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, esteemed delegations. At the outset, I wish to congratulate Mr. Khalil al-Rahman on his election as President of the General Assembly at its 81st session. I wish him every success in the discharge of his duties. I also extend my appreciation and gratitude to Ms. Annalena Baerbock for her capable stewardship of the previous session. I would be remiss not to express our appreciation to His Excellency, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, for his defense of legitimate causes and his protection of the Charter. He has exerted considerable efforts to advance the reform process and to put forward initiatives aimed at making the United Nations more effective, influential, and representative. I stand today before this distinguished Assembly under deeply regrettable circumstances that Sudan never wished to witness within an organization founded on the principles of sovereign equality among states, respect for international law, and the guarantee of equal participation for all member states. His Excellency General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, Chairman of the Transitional Sovereign Council of the Republic of Sudan, was to stand before you today to address the General Assembly on behalf of the Sudanese people and government. However, the host country prevented this by failing to issue the visa required for His Excellency to participate in this high-level segment of the General Assembly. More regrettably still, this situation persisted despite the efforts undertaken by the Secretariat despite the Secretary General's request to the host country to issue the entry visa in accordance with its obligations under the 1947 headquarters agreement. Accordingly, the Republic of Sudan calls upon the Secretary General, the General Assembly, and the Committee on Relations with the host country to take the necessary measures to safeguard the sanctity of the Headquarters Agreement. Sudan further requests that this incident be formally documented and examined by the relevant UN mechanisms responsible for the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. Mr. President, the need remains urgent for comprehensive, equitable, and expeditious reform of the international system in light of these changes and challenges, as well as for political administration through dialogue, respect for international law, and the peaceful settlement of disputes. There is also need for refraining from the use or threat of use of international relations and avoiding the imposition of coercive sanctions merely on the basis of political disagreements or the exploitation of these sanctions as instruments to achieve specific political or economic objectives. Sudan has lived under sanctions imposed pursuant to Chapter 7 for more than two decades. These sanctions have negatively affected its economy, security, and territorial integrity. They have undermined Sudanese sovereignty and status, exacerbated cycles of violence affecting the protection of civilians and vulnerable sectors, and hindered national reconciliation. The continued disregard for and violation of the purposes and principles of the UN Charter through the use or threat of use of force in international relations and through interference in the internal affairs of states in various forms and through disregard for the established principles of international law threatened confidence in the multilateral international system and in the Charter of the United Nations itself. Hence the need for United Nations reform, particularly reform of the Security Council. Africa should be represented by two permanent seats, and the working methods of the Security Council should be improved in line with current developments and realities. The international financial system should be reformed so as to ensure equality of opportunity in accessing finance and in implementing the Millennium and Sustainable Development Goals, as well as climate action. Mr. President, we in Sudan are a peace-loving nation, but we also seek a just peace. Therefore, from this UN hall, we reaffirm that comprehensive, lasting, and just peace in Sudan in a manner that ensures the non-recurrence of conflict cannot be achieved without ending persistent external interference, halting the flow of weapons, ammunition, and mercenaries into Sudan, dismantling the terrorist militia, stopping its attacks against civilians, cities, civilian objects, infrastructure, dams, medical centers, and hospitals, disarming this militia, and ensuring that arms remain exclusively in the hands of the state and its established legitimate national institutions. We also call for the support for the steady progress being made by the Sudanese government in the protection of civilians and the peace-building process. Mr. President, peace and stability in Sudan cannot be discussed while the destructive war waged by Dagalow's terrorist militia against the Sudanese people continues. the international community's silence and its failure to take steps to deter the atrocities and violations committed by the rebel militia in Sudan, despite the availability of documented and credible evidence and its disregard for legitimate calls to designate it as a terrorist organization and its failure to take decisive measures to stem the flow of weapons, material, and mercenary supporting the terrorist militia across our borders are the factors that prolong the war and encourage the militia's continued aggression. Silence regarding the atrocities committed by the terrorist militia in Sudan is not only shameful, unethical, and complicit. It is a betrayal of the civilian victims, of women and girls who have demonstrated unprecedented resilience in enduring suffering beyond description and indeed of an entire people. Mr. President, the call for a comprehensive, nationally-owned Sudanese-Sudanese dialogue to achieve peace represents one of the key pillars of peace and the optimal path for resolving the current crisis. However, a conducive environment must be established to ensure its success and the achievement of its intended outcomes. This should be through the following. Parallel and measurable measures to protect civilians, reduce polarization, de-escalate tensions, and contain political estrangement among civilian political and military forces. constructive confidence-building measures to provide the dialogue with credibility and legitimacy. The dialogue being conducted through a purely Sudanese will, free from external interference and free from bargaining, intimidation, and coercion practiced by some parties at present. The implementation of the provisions of the Jeddah Declaration regarding the Sudanese Armed Forces and the rapid support forces, including fundamental obligations under international humanitarian law, the facilitation of humanitarian action, meeting the needs of civilians and affected persons, and ensuring the safe and voluntary passage of civilians leaving areas of hostilities. Mr. President, past experiences and the wars imposed upon Sudan have taught us that peace is not achieved merely through the signing of peace agreements without addressing the root causes of the crisis and eliminating its underlying drivers, thereby preventing its recurrence. Rather, peace is a process requiring patience, determination, and commitment to addressing the root causes of conflict, removing sources of instability, disarming armed groups, restricting arms possession to the state and building peace. The state has already begun preparations and creating a conducive environment for this dialogue aimed at reaching common ground through free discussion and placing the country on the path towards the most appropriate and inclusive political transition that excludes no one except outlaws and traitors. This transition should ultimately lead to free and fair elections in which all Sudanese participate under international and regional observation, allowing our people to determine who governs them at the conclusion of the democratic transition. Sudan has joined the Barors platform in recognition of the importance of development financing. We are actively participating in its foundational work in preparation for its first session next October. This is undertaken in support of efforts to implement a roadmap for debt relief. Sudan also seeks to improve relations with international financial institutions, secure the lifting of its temporary suspension from the International Monetary Fund, and establish development partnerships that will enable it to manage the recovery stage. We wish to express our sincere gratitude to the least developed countries group for the confidence it has placed in us and for electing us as vice chair of the group's International Coordinating Bureau by consensus. We shall work to advance its development interests and economic recovery and ensure a smooth and secure graduation from this category. In the same spirit, Sudan has been among the first countries to join the Global Alliance for South-South and Triangular Cooperation. This reflects our belief in the importance of strengthening solidarity, mutual benefit, and horizontal partnership as an alternative to traditional vertical aid-based relations. We hope that our membership will help leverage the considerable influence of this alliance in preparing the country for the post-war period, including economic recovery and reconstruction. Mr. President, we reaffirm Sudan's openness to any sincere and constructive effort aimed at ending the war imposed on its people, thereby securing peace, preserving the unity, territorial integrity, and political independence of the state, and preventing the outbreak of another armed rebellion. Nevertheless, at the same time, we reiterate our categorical rejection of any attempt to impose solutions, dictates, or external agendas upon our people. The Sudanese people alone are the makers of that decision and will determine their future without influence or pressure in accordance with the principle of national ownership of peace building affirmed in Security Council Resolution 2736. On this basis, we affirm our readiness to cooperate constructively with initiatives aimed at addressing the root causes of the crisis, ending the unjust aggression against our people, preserving national state institutions and sovereignty, supporting efforts to achieve peace and development, and overcoming current challenges. We have supported the efforts of the Secretary General's personal envoy for Sudan and his consultations with neighboring countries, and we have responded positively to constructive proposals and initiatives aimed at ending the war of aggression. We have also advanced a purely Sudanese effort to overcome the crisis, restore stability, and rebuild the country. This was embodied in the roadmap submitted to the Security Council in December 2025. In parallel, Sudan continues its positive cooperation with the United Nations, including the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We continue to cooperate with the Office of the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and armed conflict, as well as human rights mechanisms. They have enjoyed support from the government of Sudan, whether through the country office or the designated human rights experts on Sudan. We renew our appreciation for and support of the positions of sisterly and friendly countries that support Sudan's sovereignty, unity, and national institutions. We call upon the international community to capitalize on global momentum and show solidarity with Darfur following the Daglo militias takeover of al-Fashir and the compelling evidence and testimony presented by the Sultan of the Masalate people to the Security Council. We call upon you to advance legal accountability processes for the perpetrators. This is one of the effective avenues for de-escalation and for curbing the wave of violations committed by the militia with considerable support from its regional and external sponsors. These continued violations alone undermine the credibility of any political partnership in the political wing of the Rapid Support Forces militia during the remainder of the transition period, given its continued and reprehensible complicity. The Security Council has failed to condemn and identify the sponsors, thereby contributing to the concealment of those atrocities. These sponsors have also continued to recruit foreign mercenaries and provided political cover for the militia's political wing while fabricating accusations against the Sudanese armed forces, supported by regionally funded platforms backed by the militia's sponsors that disseminate disinformation, baseless allegations, and fabricated condemnations aimed at tarnishing the reputation of our professional armed forces. armed forces have fought alongside the Allies during World War II. The response has been efforts to undermine and destroy the armed forces and to impose sanctions on their leaders and expand the Darfur arms embargo to encompass all of Sudan. This paves the way for the victory of the militia and the foreign mercenaries who constitute 60 percent of its members. Throughout this war of aggression, the Sudanese armed forces have adhered to the following principles. The protection of civilians in accordance with the approved national plan submitted by Sudan to the Security Council. Distinction at all times between combatants and civilians and between civilian objects and military targets. Taking precautionary measures to avoid and minimize incidental harm, refraining from using civilians as human shields, refraining from recruiting child soldiers, refraining from enforced disappearances and the arbitrary detention of civilians, and adhering to humanitarian truces. To end the war, pressure must be exerted on the regional sponsors and certain neighboring states that have not merely facilitated the transfer of weapons, equipment, and supplies to the militia through their territories, but have also created battlefronts and enabled repeated attacks launched by militias and mercenaries from within their territories in broad daylight and established hospitals along their borders to treat militia casualties. Mr. President, the cause of Palestine remains the central issue in the Middle East. The Palestinian people must be empowered to exercise their right to self-determination and establish their independent state with Jerusalem as its capital, and refugees must be allowed to return in accordance with the resolutions of international legitimacy. Sudan also stresses the importance of stability in the Red Sea, Bab al-Mandeb, and the Gulf region given their impact on the wider region. There is a need to end the current situation in a manner that spares the peoples of the region the scourge of war and its consequences. We reaffirm our full support for the countries of the region in preserving their sovereignty, security, and stability. We underscore the importance of respect for international law and the Charter of the United nations and the importance of refraining from interference in the internal affairs of states. Before concluding, allow me to convey to you the greetings of General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, who is at this moment among his people as they chant in one voice, one army, one people behind their leader. and the mercy and blessings of God be upon you all.
