the assembly will now hear an address by his excellency hassan sheikh mohamud president of the federal republic of somalia I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. The President, the Excellencies, the distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen, it's a great honor to address the first session of the United Nations General Assembly at the moment of profound uncertainty in our world. I congratulate his excellence Khalil Rahman on his election as the president of this session and assure him of Somalia's full support and cooperation. I also commend Secretary General Antonio Guterres for his continued service to the United Nations and his steadfast defense of multilateralism. He will be missing very much after he concludes his term as Secretary General this year. Indeed, his successor will have extremely large boots to fill going forward. For generations, the United Nations has represented humanity's shared determination to replace conflict with dialogue, domination with cooperation, and despair with hope. Yet today, many of the ideals and values we want to collectively defend are being questioned and challenged. Respect for international law is becoming increasingly selective. Multilateral cooperation is weakening. Conflict, geopolitical rivalry and mistrust are becoming defining features of our time. uncertainty, unfortunately, has become the new norm. I remember the sense of optimism that accompanied the transition from the millennium development goals to the sustainable development goals in 2015. There was genuine hope that we were beginning a new chapter, one in which no person, no community, no country would be left behind. Eleven years later, we must have the courage to admit that the world is not where we expected it to be. Progress towards achieving the sustainable development goals by 2030 stands at 36% only. This is far too low. Conflicts between and within the states are increasing. Humanitarian needs are rising while the resources available to meet them are rapidly declining. Nationalism, intolerance and political polarization are weakening the spirit of international cooperation. At the same time, the climate crisis continues to destroy lives, livelihoods and public infrastructure, particularly across the developing world. According to the United Nations, over 40% of the global population are vulnerable to the destructive effects of the climate change. And governments in developing countries spend over 10% of their GDP to respond to this. These painful fiscal trade office come at the expense of investment in the education and health, which should never be the case. For millions of vulnerable people, global development can sometimes appear to be moving from one framework to another framework. One set from one framework to another one set promises to the next without sufficient transformation in their daily lives. new declarations and targets value, but they cannot substitute for effective implementation. This is why this year's theme is both timely and necessary. Trust in the UN will not be restored through declarations alone. It will be restored when institutions act consistently, uphold international law, and produce results that people can see and experience. Excellences, ladies and gentlemen, the United Nations Charter is found on sovereign equality, territorial integrity, peaceful coexistence, human rights, and dignity of every person. The most important word in this year's theme is all, not some, not a selected group of nations, not only those with the greatest economy and military mighty. The promise of the Charter belongs equally to every human being and every member state. Yet, the United Nations has increasingly become associated with political gridlocks in the Security Council. Prolonging negotiations without tangible outcomes and a weakening capacity to mobilize collective action in response to the threats to international peace and security. This should concern all of us, not because the United Nations is not important, but precisely because it is indispensable and appears absent from the global solutions for peace and stability in this dangerous and unpredictable time. The Security Council must become more representative, transparent and effective. Africa remains unrepresented in the permanent category and not represented enough in the permanent category as well. This historical injustice against the 54 sovereign states cannot be postponed indefinitely. Somalia supports the common African position and a meaningful African representation in both categories of the council. Given that many of the discussions directly concern African status, they have the right to full representation on equal part with all other permanent Security Council members. Reform is not an attack on the United Nations. Reform is necessary to protect its legitimacy, renew confidence in its institutions, and ensure that it remains capable of responding to the realities of our time. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, Somalia currently broadly serves as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and as a member of the African Union Peace and Security Council. We carry these responsibilities with great seriousness, humility and determination in both institutions. Somalia works to uphold the principles of the United Nations Charter and Constitutive Act of the African Union, strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, prevent conflict and support peaceful Africa-led solution with global benefits. This respect for national sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity is not an abstract principle for Somalia only. It is a foundation for peace and stability in our country, our region, and the wider international community. Therefore Somalia firmly rejects unilateral actions that undermine its sovereign, unity, internationally recognized borders. Disagreements between nations must be resolved through dialogue and in accordance with the international law and not through actions that create new tensions or threaten the regional stability. Somalia stands firmly with Palestinian people and their legitimate right to self-determination and statehood. We reaffirm our support for a just and lasting peace based on two-state solution with an independent and viable Palestinian state along with the 1967 borders. A just resolution of the Palestinian question remains essential to the lasting peace and stability in the Middle East and beyond. Excellences, ladies and gentlemen, UN political reform must be accompanied by institutional administrative and operational renewal. For nearly two decades, we have discussed the need to make United Nations operations more agile, coordinated, cost-effective, and capable of delivering measurable results. some progress has been made and we recognize the dedication of many United Nations personnel working under difficulty conditions around the world. However, we must also honest, the results have not yet matched our collective expectation. In countries like mine where the United Nations has maintained a sustainable presence for more than three decades, operations can become more effective by aligning more closely with our national priorities and using credible national systems. The majority of United Nations assistance continues to be delivered through parallel structures, fragmented projects and off-budget arrangements in Somalia. This makes it difficult for the government to plan, coordinate resources, measure results and build institutions required for long-term stability. Let us be clear here. Somalia is not calling for United Nations to withdraw. So we are simply calling for a more accountable, strategic and result-oriented partnership where Somali institutions are in the lead when it comes to implementation. Indeed, Somalia wants a partnership in which international assistance reinforces rather than replaces national leadership. This partnership is one in which national institutions are strengthened rather than bypassed, and both government and international organizations are mutually accountable for the results. The base argument of the past UN agencies' development thinking that countries like Somalia lack capacity must be condemned impermanently to the discipline of history. It is where it belongs. We now have capable people, institutions, policies that are proudly guiding our national transformation agenda. We must also ask ourselves why we continue to mobilize vital resources to respond to crisis while investing far less in preventing them. The UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction estimates that every $1 invested in proactive measures, resilient infrastructure, or early anticipatory actions, saves between $3 to $15 in future damages and response costs. Therefore, we cannot remain trapped in a cycle of financing the consequences of the conflict while neglecting the peace building or responding humanitarian emergencies while underinvesting in resilience and anticipatory actions. Prevention is more cost effective, it's more humane and it's more sustainable. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, now, El Neno is strengthening and is likely to bring another period of significant climate stress across the world with disproportionate impact on nations like Somalia. We must learn from what has happened before and be better prepared, not simply respond after the destruction it leaves in in its wake as a community of nations. Mr. President, Excellencies and gentlemen, Somalia is successfully leading on its own national development. Our government is implementing the national transformation plan, strengthening public financial management, expanding domestic revenue, and investing in the capability of our national institutions. For over five decades, our people have dreamed of choosing their leaders through their vote. The last democratic election that took place in Somalia held in 1969. Today, we are determined to change that history. Through constitutional reform, we are laying the foundations of universal suffrage, accountable institutions, and a multi-party political system that allows every Somali citizen to have a voice. We engaged all Somali political leaders, federal member states, civil society, women groups and youth groups, and the diaspora to take part constructively in the hopeful political transformation. This is the first time that a real political reform is taking place in Somalia in the more than six decades that we were independent. Our aim is to become an effective democracy where differences are resolved through dialogue, law, and elections, not violence. We invite the United Nations and our international partners to support this transition by helping to strengthen democratic institutions but always respecting our ownership of the somali democracy excellences ladies and gentlemen this new progressive chapter where political power is determined by citizens guided by constitutional law and safeguarded by the rule of law That's how we are building a durable Somali state. Our is a democracy where every citizen has a voice, where every vote has a value, and where every government is accountable. That is our commitment to our people and to our world. Somalia also continues to confront international terrorism with determination and with the support of our international partners. We are strengthening our national security, our national security institutions, improving force generation, developing intelligence capabilities, and expanding security cooperation with our neighbors and the rest of the world. But the fight against terrorism in Somalia must not be understood as a Somalia's responsibility alone. We stand on the front line for a struggle that directly affects regional and international security. We therefore call for a predictable, sustainable support for Somalia's security transition, including adequate financing for African Union mission in Somalia. The transition towards full Somali security responsibility must be properly resorted, facing in a firmly anchored and capable Somali institutions. Following debt relief in Somalia, economy continues to grow on the foundations of strong reforms. Our real GDP growth this year is 3.1. Despite all the global shocks we are experiencing, we also continue to strengthen public financial management, increase domestic revenue, enhance budget transparency, and deepen our fiscal sector. sector. We are actively working to improve the investment environment to create opportunities for all our people who are mainly a young population. We also continue to strategically increase investment in education, health, and human capital despite the pressures created by geopolitical tensions, recurrent climate shocks, and rising global prices. Serious example of a regional tension negatively impacting Somalia's development is the issue of the Strait of Hormuz. For Somalia, disruptions in the Strait of Hormuz have serious economic and humanitarian consequences. As an import dependent country reliant on the Middle East for much of our food, fuel, trade, Somalia is already facing rising prices, inflation, and increasing transparency and insurance costs while drought linked to climate change is affecting overall over six million people in Somalia. The disruption has also contributed to an estimated 40 percent decline in our customers-based revenue, a critical resource of financing Somalia's economic reform, growth, and poverty reduction. ensuring free and fair navigation through the strait is therefore essential to protecting vulnerable economies like Somalia and sustaining stability, advancing development and delivering basic services. Sustainable development requires strong institutions. in Somalia, we have created institutions capable of translating international commitments into national results. These include the National Climate Fund through which Somalia is mobilizing and coordinating urgently needed climate finance. The Independent National Human Rights Commission established Somalia to strengthen the protection and the promotion of human rights and the Somali disaster management agency establishing, which is on the front line of responding to the humanitarian crisis in Somalia. Somalia's membership of the East African community, our leadership in the whole of Africa initiative, our ratification of the agreement establishing the African continental trade area, free trade area, and our continuing efforts towards accession to the World Trade Organization, demonstrated Somalia's commitment to the regional integration and rules-based international order. Excellences, ladies and gentlemen, financing is biviter for development. Therefore, the promise of sustainable development cannot be fulfilled without reform of the international financial architecture. In the same way that the Security Council must reflect today's political realities, international financial institutions must reflectively, effectively respond to today's economic and environmental realities with relevant, affordable and accessible financial products which can be dispersed in a timely manner. In conclusion, Somalia is probably playing an active role in global stability, both at home and within the key existing multilateral structures of global governance. We are also rebuilding our economy and unwaveringly committing to democracy and people-centered, people-led, people-owned development. As we march forward with purpose and determination, we invite Africa and the rest of the world to remain our steadfast champions on this journey. On the UN, indeed, the UN remains vital to global governance and multilateralism. Yet, restoring trust requires consistency. Managing transformation requires courage and cooperation. Delivering for all requires fair representation, accessible resources, measurable results, especially for the developing countries. Somalia stands ready to work with every member state to reform the Security Council, strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, and improve development financing, confront climate change, and build multilateral system that treats every nation and every person with equal dignity. let us move beyond promises and towards performance let us invest not only in managing crisis but also in preventing them and let us build a United Nations that does not simply speak in the name of all humanity but delivers better for all humanity I thank you all On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
