The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Lord Fakafanwa, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Tonga. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the Assembly. Mr. President, the General Assembly, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I bring you warm greetings from His Majesty King Dubois VI and the people of the Kingdom of Tonga. Nine months into my service as Prime Minister, I stand here, mindful that Pacific leaders have come before me, raising the same warnings, making the same appeals. Today I'm compelled to make them again. The question before us is not whether the world has heard our message, but why has it still not acted? We live in a world more connected than ever, but greater connection has not brought greater unity. We meet amid deepening division, geopolitical conflict and competition. For Tonga, navigating such stormy currents is not new. As descendants of voyagers, we have been in the survival business much longer than most have appreciated. King George I, Tonga preserved its independence during an era of colonial expansion. Our Constitution of 1875 secured Tongans' rights and freedoms over seven decades before the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It reflects our fierce determination to chart our own course. That is the essence of our sovereignty. Multilateralism allows us to project the power of our ideas rather than the might of our power. Tonga participates as an equal under the founding principles of the United Nations Charter, the sovereign equality of states. This is how we must approach our theme, restoring trust, managing transformation, a united nation that delivers for all. Enduring trust is restored when commitments produce results. True transformation is realized when our communities, economies and ecosystems can anticipate change and recover with greater strength. The small iron-developing states must not bear the disproportionate costs of the challenges they did little to create. Mr. President, too much of our international architecture still reflects the world of 1945 rather than today's realities. If the United Nations is to remain the principal vehicle through which sovereign nations confront global challenges, it must transform. We need a United Nations that enables innovation, one that expands meaningful access to investment and technology, especially for the islands, developing countries who are too often excluded from both. We need a stronger General Assembly and institutions that respond effectively to the needs of the majority of our members. We cannot keep negotiating climate, biodiversity and the ocean in separate COPs when they are clearly an interconnected ecosystem requiring integrated and coherent solutions. We call on global processes to recognize the ocean-climate nexus and address these interconnected challenges together. We need a more inclusive Security Council equipped for today's challenges. A Security Council that recognizes the triple planetary crisis as a profound threat to peace and security. We need a financial architecture that delivers timely and accessible financing to those who most need them. Internationally, pledged commitments must be actioned urgently. The next Secretary General must understand these realities intimately. It is in this spirit that Tonga has nominated Ambassador Yvonne Bucky of Ecuador, whose vision for a renewed, reformed United Nations speaks to the needs of vulnerable states. To restore trust, every member state, large or small, must have a voice in shaping this organization's future and a stake in its success. Mr. President, Your Excellencies, the Pacific region spans one-third of the Earth's surface. It is our home. Through the 2050 strategy for the Blue Pacific continent, we have set our own course and identified our thematic priorities. For Tonga, investing in the ocean and nature is foundational in achieving its development ambition. Protecting and restoring then builds our climate resilience. It strengthens our food security and enables a sustainable blue economy. The financing and partnerships we build around ocean and nature-based solutions will help determine our future and sustain our people. Mr. President, we have declared our region an ocean of peace in 2025. It sends a clear message. The Pacific must not become a staging ground for military escalation or a battleground for major power rivalry. However, our ocean of peace is more than the absence of conflict. Our most pressing threats are already reaching our shores. transnational crime, illicit drugs, illegal, unregulated and unreported phishing, cyber threats and unresolved consequences of nuclear testing and radioactive contamination remain. In this respect, our region is committed to directly utilizing innovative technologies and working closely with our trusted security partners to address our security challenges. We are committed to protecting the rights of marginalized people and ending violence against women and young girls. This year, Tonga ratified United Nations Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities, reaffirming our commitment to the dignity and the equal participation of persons with disabilities. We also acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. In doing so, we completed the universalization of the CTBT in the Pacific. On climate, the Pacific is already drowning in a crisis that others continue to postpone addressing. UNEP's limiting overshoot report warns that exceeding 1.5 degrees Celsius could occur within the next few years. But crossing that threshold must not become an excuse for abandoning it. We must peak as low as possible and return below 1.5 degrees Celsius as quickly as possible. Every fraction of a degree matters. The Pacific loses an estimated $500 million every year due to natural disasters such as cyclones, flooding Early warning systems give communities time to prepare and reduce these losses That may be a modest sum in global terms But for Pacific nations, it is a heavy toll on our countries and our people And yet the financing to prevent such losses still falls short. The Pacific Resiliency Facility, our own financing mechanism for building community resilience, needs a further $328 million in pledges to reach its initial capitalization target of $500 million. Weather Ready Pacific, designed to reduce the human and economic costs of severe weather events, needs a further $160 million to reach its target. Tonga's Climate Trust Fund, a direct community fund which dispersed its first round of grants this year, also requires significant funding support. We call on all our partners to invest in these Pacific-designed and Pacific-owned solutions. Tonga stands behind 2,026 Pacific Iron Forum leaders the Belau Declaration, and calls on all our major emitters to act urgently. Climate action is a legal obligation, but meeting those obligations will require difficult decisions rooted in science. Climate leadership is not a popularity contest. Seven of the nine planetary boundaries have been breached by human activity. Climate action is not an option. Tonga is accelerating its transition away from fossil fuels and expanding renewable energy, and we encourage the shift to electric vehicles. For us, decarbonizing also means greater energy security and protection from global fuel price shocks. We must phase out the explicit fossil fuel subsidies estimated by the IMF at $725 billion. International financial institutions and multilateral development banks must recognize the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index, the MVI, which ensures that it informs eligibility and allocations. By any credible index, Tonga is amongst the world's most vulnerable countries. However, we call on all nations, especially the world's largest emitters, to attend the pre-COP 31 meetings in Fiji and Tuvalu in October this year. Come to the Pacific and confront what 1.5 degrees means for our water, our people, our food, our homes, and our security. We welcome the General Assembly's declaration on sea level rise, a significant achievement for the preservation of sovereignty. It marks the first time all Member States have agreed on a single common text on sea level rise. Our resilience account for every hazard, including geohazards confronting our islands. Over the last few years, Tonga has endured cyclones, flooding, earthquakes and tsunamis. This year, the Super El Niño, currently forming over the Pacific Ocean, further intensifies weather patterns, compounding the pressures on our people. We therefore need integrated warning and response systems that can protect our communities against the full range of planetary risks. has committed to protecting at least 30% of our ocean by 2030. Our ratification of the BB&J agreement extends that commitment beyond our waters, supporting the protection of marine biodiversity on the high seas. Our task is to navigate a course that safeguards the ocean and unlocks its value to our people. This principle underpins Tonga's ocean strategy. It is in that spirit that we intend to convene a Polynesian Ocean Summit in Tonga, May of 2027, to move from shared ambition to practical action. But our responsibility does not stop at the boundaries of our Pacific continent. Consider the humpback whales. Born in Tonga's warm oceans, it migrates to Antarctica to feed on krill before returning to the Pacific to escape the winter and breed. Tonga's sanctuary protects them, but their survival depends on healthy ecosystems at both ends of that journey. What happens in the southern seas of Antarctica is felt in the southern oceans of Tonga. So we invite partners to join us in Tonga with practical commitments that recognize the scale and interconnectedness of our shared ocean corridors. Mr. President, the same principle extends across our development. Interconnection must not be dependency. For Tonga, resilience means taking greater control of the forces shaping our future and turning the resources within our geography into greater self-sufficiency. When we import fossil fuels, we also import their volatility. Moving away from them is therefore both a climate imperative and an energy security necessity. Tonga is not short of ambition. 70% renewable energy by 2030, 100% renewable energy by 2035. However, the forces shaping our future are not solely environmental or economic. They're increasingly technological. Mr. President, digital connectivity and rapid technology investments are transforming how we live. They offer significant opportunities for big ocean sovereign states, BOSS, but they also risk creating new inequalities and dependencies. Those who benefit last from global change often bear its highest costs. We continue to live with that injustice through climate change. We cannot, again, be asked to adapt only after systems have been built and the rules written. For Tonga, submarine cables and satellite links are foundational infrastructures that connect our islands to global opportunities. But connectivity alone is not enough. skills and secure, resilient systems must support it. And we will protect our children online and retain sovereignty over our national data. Tonga does not need to be first in artificial intelligence, quantum computing, or every technology that follows. But Tonga will not simply endure global transformations. It will exercise sovereignty by helping shape the rules and norms around it. Tonga is looking beyond conventional development models. We are seeking to unlock new forms of finance through responsible valuation of our natural assets, our ocean assets, while exploring the potential of frontier technologies such as quantum science. We will form the right partnerships. We will direct innovation towards our priorities. But the Pacific's data ocean, biodiversity, critical minerals and traditional knowledge must not power the next technological revolution while returning only a fraction of their value to our people. Mr. President, from experience, Tonga knows its challenges and we will meet them with determination that has always defined our people. We also know our strengths as a boss. We are not asking for charity. We will do our part. We will simply ask that others do theirs. Meet the 1.5 degrees Celsius threshold. Help us protect the planet we all share and the ocean that connects us. Ensure that everyone benefits from technological advancements. Recognize the imbalance between the funds we commit to addressing our collective development challenges and those we are prepared to spend on conflict. Let's uphold the rules and institutions that allow every nation to participate as an equal sovereign. That is the promise at the heart of the United Nations, not that all nations would be equal in power, but that no nation, however powerful, is more sovereign than another. That is the multilateral system Tonga believes in, an international rules-based order founded on the UN Charter and Equality of Nations. And that is the multilateral system we must preserve. Mr. President, I so submit. God bless us all. Malo Apito. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Tonga.
