The Assembly will hear an address by His Excellency Recep Tayyip Erdogan, President of the Republic of Turkiye. I request the protocol to escort His Excellency and invite him to address the assembly Thank You Thank you. President Trump, Mr. President, Excellencies, heads of state and government, Mr. Secretary General, esteemed delegates, I greet you with my warmest regards on behalf of myself and my nation, and I am deeply pleased to address you once again from this podium. I pray to Almighty God that the 81st session of the UN General Assembly will be a blessing for all of humanity, particularly for the oppressed. I wish to express my sincere appreciation to Ms. Baerbock for her past term as the President of the General Assembly, and I extend my best wishes to Mr. Rahman as he assumes the Presidency of the General Assembly. I would like to extend my congratulations and gratitude to my esteemed friend, Mr. Guterres, who has served as Secretary General of the UN for nearly ten years with impartiality and above all, with courage and integrity. First and foremost, I would like to express my sadness over a matter. The State of Palestine is officially recognized by the overwhelming majority of member states here, but His Excellency Mahmoud Abbas, the esteemed President of the State of Palestine, has been unable to attend these sessions for two consecutive years now. This injustice against our Palestinian brothers and sisters deeply offends the conscience of humanity. Let it be known that although President Abbas is unable to be with us here in person, we will, as we did last year, continue to be the voice of a free and sovereign state of Palestine. and from this rostrum, from this podium, will continue to make the Palestinian people's fight heard throughout the world. On this occasion, I once again call upon all countries who have not yet recognized the state of Palestine to reconsider their position. Mr. President, distinguished members, when the UN Charter was signed on the 26th of June 1945, the member states declared the following with a lot of hope. Quote, We, the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind, and to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights in the dignity and worth of the human person and to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties can be maintained, to live together in peace with one another as good neighbors, and to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security, unquote, they declared at the time. And although it's been 81 years since signing of the treaty, humanity is still eagerly waiting for the day for the strong determination of that time to actually come to life. There's no need to look too far. It's just enough to look at the picture that has unfolded over the last one year period. Consider this. The past 12 months have gone down in history as one of the bloodiest periods of the last 30 years, marked by more than 60 conflicts and wars. From Gaza to Ukraine and Russia, from Myanmar to Darfur, from Iran to Lebanon, 250,000 people have lost their lives. And far more, far more number of people have endured indescribable suffering. Hundreds of thousands of people have been forced to leave the lands where they were born and raised. In Gaza alone, over the past three years, we have lost 74,000 of our brothers and sisters, most of them women and children, mind you. We lost them to what we regard as acts of state terror by Israel. The people of Gaza are still searching for their loved ones beneath the rubble. They are recovering the bodies of their spouses, their children or parents. Innocent children who have lost their arms and legs in Israeli attacks are trying to return to school, they are trying to hold on to life with prosthetic legs made of wood. In Gaza's hospitals, more than 70% of power generators are currently out of service due to fuel shortages. Personally, as a father and as a grandfather who cherishes his children and grandchildren, I have to say the following from this podium with a heavy heart. Today Gaza is not only the world's largest graveyard for children. It is also the place with the highest rate of child amputations in the world. Gaza has become the most inhumane and shameful concentration camp of our time. In fact, a ceasefire was reached thanks to President Trump's efforts and with contributions of countries, including my country, Turkey. But even after the ceasefire, the number of Gazans killed exceeded 1,500. Although the Palestinian resistance movement has agreed to move to the second stage of the peace plan, the Israeli government refuses to stop the occupation. Meanwhile, the West Bank is witnessing the most severe period of what we regard as settler violence and terror. In Jerusalem, Muslims and Christians are being denied access to holy sites. There is an attempt to destroy UNRWA, which is our collective initiative. Now, esteemed friends, today once again I will speak from the heart with complete sincerity and without reservation and I'll state straight some facts plainly. Please don't be offended or upset. I'm sorry, but this is not Tayyip Erdoğan's personal matter. This is a humanitarian issue. It is a matter of conscience for all of us. We are faced with a genocidal mindset that can never get enough of killing. We are faced with an extremely serious situation. No one with a sense of humanity, mercy or compassion, no one guided by justice and conscience can possibly remain indifferent to this picture. This picture must be a shocking one for all of us, and what it tells us is clear. The United Nations established 81 years ago to maintain international peace and security is no longer able to fulfill this mission, or more precisely, it has been rendered unable to do so. The UN continues to be weakened. Those in Palestine, in Lebanon, Sudan and in other crisis zones who have tied their hopes to the UN are deeply disappointed. But let me remind you that one day everyone will have to seek refuge in the collective conscience of humanity. Today we may feel safe, we may feel prosperous and at peace. Today we may live in comfort, far away from conflict zones and from crisis areas. But none of us knows what tomorrow will bring or what might happen to us. It is for this reason that I think that this year's General Assembly theme is particularly timely and pertinent, because it focuses on restoring trust in the international system. We support the sincere efforts of the Secretary General in this regard, including efforts around the UN-80 initiative. We expect this commitment to reform to continue in the same direction during the next Secretary-General's term. Of course, I also want to clearly state the following here. If we are truly committed to restoring confidence in the UN, the steps that must be taken are actually clear. Children in Gaza must be safe. When Palestinian children look up at the sky, they will see kites flying freely, not fighter jets, UAVs or drones. Children in Lebanon will not wake up in the middle of the night to the sound of bombings. The labor of Asian workers will not be exploited by ruthless capitalists. Our African brothers and sisters will look to their future with as much confidence and hope as the citizens of prosperous countries. Now, only in this way can trust in the UN possibly be restored. We must acknowledge that a system in which the will of more than 190 countries is subject to the whim of just five countries is not a fair system, and it is not capable of fully inspiring or establishing trust either. The Security Council must absolutely be reformed in accordance with the principle that the world is bigger than five. friends while we must keep pace with rapidly advancing technology we also have the demanding but noble responsibility of building a more equitable international order at this point I want to share with you some basic principles first and foremost we are compelled to change the current mindset where international law is applied differently to the strong versus to the weak. Let us not forget that an international system where wrongdoers get away with it, and to make it worse, where impunity has become the norm, such an international system, let's face it, is doomed to decay. Secondly, whenever international efforts fall short in resolving crises, we must harness regional ownership as an effective means of addressing those issues. As Turkey, whenever we have acted upon this principle, as in the case of the Black Sea Grain Corridor, we have achieved results and we have contributed to both regional and to global security. Third, we must absolutely reestablish an approach that places cooperation and open diplomacy at the core, at the center of relations among states. History has shown us time and again through bitter experiences that there is no winner in a political approach which is built on mistrust. Fourth, we must jointly build a new paradigm that offers solutions to the increasingly deepening income inequalities around the world. We believe that the path to this lies in joint development, solidarity and connectivity. Societies connected to one another through roads, trade with energy networks and joint production will eventually be united in peace and stability as well. And lastly, by promoting a human-centered approach to technology, we must prevent new barriers from being built between those who possess technology and those who do not. It must be understood that techno-polarization and digital hegemony serve neither the interests of the UN-centered system nor the interests of those of the states that constitute the United Nations core. Esteemed delegates, Turkey does not confine itself to just articulating these principles. With every step we take, we seek a more equitable and more humane international system. Through the defense alliance we have established recently with Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, based on the principle of regional ownership, we are now both strengthening solidarity among us and aiming to generate solutions to the problems in our region from within the region itself. We are maintaining our efforts with the relevant actors to bring an end to the climate of conflict and to the climate of war that has been ignited in the Gulf. I strongly underline that any dangerous attempt to spread these conflicts, these clashes to neighboring regions serves no one's interests. As for Gaza, we remain committed to following through on the agreement we signed in Sharm al-Sheikh one year ago. Now we must begin the reconstruction of Gaza as soon as possible. In this regard, I call upon you to exert greater pressure, more pressure on Israel. Let everyone now understand and accept the following. Attempts to strangle the state of Palestine will fail. God willing, we shall see those good days when an independent state of Palestine based on the 1967 borders with territorial integrity and with East Jerusalem as its capital will be established. Dear friends, after 14 years of oppression, Syria initiated a new path with the December 8th revolution. Under the leadership of President Shara, we are witnessing Syria now moving toward its goal of becoming a safe and peaceful country, in spite of all forms of internal and external provocations. We'll continue to stand by the brotherly Syrian people on this journey. In Iraq, another neighboring country, we fully support efforts to strengthen state authority and consolidate stability. We are working with Iraq on strategic transportation and energy projects that will enhance the welfare of our region. Particularly among these projects, important is the development road project. As for the Russia-Ukraine war, it is our sincere hope that it comes to an end with Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity being upheld. We continue our contacts with the parties with a view to restoring safety of navigation in the Black Sea, ensuring food security and preventing the war from spreading to a wider region. I would like to particularly emphasize that recent attacks against commercial ships in the Black Sea, regardless of who carries them out, are unacceptable. We believe that freedom of navigation in the Strait of Hermes must be maintained. In the Aegean Sea and the Eastern Mediterranean region, we wish to see existing issues resolved on the basis of good neighborly relations and in accordance with international law. Our proposal for an Eastern Mediterranean Conference will contribute to establishing common ground. On this occasion, I once again will repeat the call I had made numerous times in previous UNGA sessions. The sovereign equality and equal international status of the Turkish Cypriot people must be recognized, and the inhumane isolation to which they have been subjected must finally come to an end. to an end. I call upon the international community to recognize the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and to establish political, diplomatic, and economic relations with them. Esteemed delegates, Turkey, thanks to its growing defense industry and thanks its resilient economy continues to be an island of stability in the middle of conflicts in its vicinity. As an integral part of Europe, our country plays a significant role in ensuring the welfare and security of the European continent. The NATO Ankara summit, which we successfully hosted in July, was a concrete manifestation of our commitment to our common security. A Europe that excludes Turkey from its security architecture cannot, and let me say this clearly, It cannot possibly be stronger or safer. We are shaping our future with the European Union precisely through this strategic vision. And we expect the same vision from the European Union as well. The Balkans is a region with which we have strong historical, cultural and human ties. Within the Balkans Peace Platform, we are taking joint steps to deepen our cooperation with them. And our position on the South Caucasus is also quite clear. Namely, we hope for the establishment of lasting peace between Azerbaijan and Armenia. We commend and support the commitment to a solution demonstrated by President Aliyev and Prime Minister Pashinyan. We are also advancing with determination the normalization process between our country and Armenia. I would also like to express with pleasure the following. The organization of Turkic states has become an exemplary model of regional cooperation that is growing in strength year by year. The 13th Leaders' Summit, to be held in Ankara on the 13th of October, will, we hope, open new doors and new horizons for the organization. The fourth Turkey-Africa Partnership Summit, which we will organize in Libya in December, symbolizes the institutional partnership we have been building for more than two decades now. In South Asia, it is important that all disputes, including the Kashmir issue, be addressed through dialogue within the framework of the United Nations Charter and of relevant resolutions. Provided that constructive action is taken, all issues can possibly be resolved. And the same applies to tensions on the African continent also. We fully support efforts for a ceasefire and for lasting peace in Sudan, as well as efforts to strengthen security, development and institutional capacity in Somalia. Meanwhile, maintaining stability and tranquility in Libya is our priority. It is imperative that the ongoing reconciliation process is led and owned by Libyans themselves. As Turkey, we continue to support the success of this process. Now, also through our Asia ANU initiative, we continue to strengthen our relations with our partners in the Asia-Pacific region. We regard the elevation of our relations with ASEAN to the level of dialogue partnership as a concrete outcome of this approach. Likewise, we are developing our relations with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean on the basis of mutual respect, partnership and a win-win approach. Distinguished members, we all drive our livelihood and the source of our life from nature. But our world stands on the threshold of serious environmental and climate-related threats. Air, water and soil, and also many living species, are being affected by climate change. While developing countries and the Pacific region are experiencing the climate crisis to their very core, they unfortunately face serious difficulties in accessing the funding they need. This November, we'll host the COP31 summit in Antalya province of Turkey. At the summit, we'll ensure that climate justice is given particular prominence. With the partnership we have developed with Australia, we aim to make COP31 an implementation COP, where financial commitments are fulfilled, technology transfer is accelerated, and promises are actually translated into concrete steps. So COP31 will be made a point of uniting us all. And taking this opportunity, I invite you to the COP31 Leaders Summit. In 2017, my wife Mrs. Emine Erdoğan initiated the Zero Waste Movement with the slogan, The World is Our Common Home. And this initiative has now evolved into a global campaign to raise awareness. It is a fact that there are for sure many ways to tackle the climate crisis. The Zero Waste Movement is the strongest bridge where all these paths meet. I believe that with your support, this bridge will become even stronger. I would also like to draw your attention to the following fact. Another threat as serious as climate change is the spread of a culture of waste fueled by an incredible desire for consumption. Every year, 5.8 trillion plates or servings of food end up in the garbage bin worldwide, meaning that more than 2 billion tons of food are being wasted. We cannot speak of justice in a world where tons of food are thrown into the garbage on one side, while hundreds of millions of people collect food from garbage containers on the other. As Turkey, we are ready to make every possible contribution both to preventing waste and to ensuring global food security. So with this understanding in mind, we have nominated Dr. Mehmet Mehdi Eker for the position of Director General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN. I'm confident that you will not withhold your support for our candidate. Now it is also worth noting the following. As our world changes fast, humanity has concurrently begun to face new social threats. Islamophobia, which is spreading like a plague in the West, is at the forefront of these issues. In particular, Muslim women and girls have been subjected to greater discrimination in recent years. We regard the headscarf bans introduced in schools by certain countries as an attack on women's most fundamental rights. Rising xenophobia, cultural racism and anti-Semitism are also toxic trends that must be combated with determination Global gender neutralization policies have also turned into a siege targeting innocent children and targeting the institution of family We can break the siege only by protecting the family consisting of women and men. Turkey will continue to take initiatives in protecting families and children in spite of attacks from certain lobby groups. Another threat that undermines social peace is the spread of disinformation on social media. Standing up for the truth has become more important today than ever before. We are also facing the same risk with artificial intelligence, AI, which is becoming increasingly difficult to control. It is long overdue now to establish a common international legal framework for AI. It is crucial to accelerate the work which is already being carried out to draft and bring into force the UN International Convention on Artificial Intelligence. Distinguished delegates, the realities I've spoken of here today with an open heart will for sure upset some people, will for sure disrupt their comfort and unmask their lives. I also know well that they will resort to all kinds of perception management operations in an attempt to silence our voice. A late poet said the following quote, they think that if we remain silent, the issue will disappear. But even if we remain silent, history will not. Even if history remains silent, the truth will not. They believe that if they get rid of us, the problem will be solved. Yet, even if they get rid of us, they'll not be able to escape the pangs of their own conscience. Even if they escape the pangs of their conscience, they will not be able to escape the pangs of history. Even if they escape the pangs of history, they will not be able to escape the punishment of God. Unquote. As Tayyip Erdoğan is the president of a great nation guided by its conscience, its history and its compassion, God willing, for as long as God grants me life, I shall continue from this podium here to defend the rights of the oppressed, the rights of the aggrieved and the voiceless. I'll continue to be their voice, to speak on their behalf and to fight for them. If necessary, we'll endure hardship. If necessary, we'll pay the price, but we'll not remain silent in the face of injustice and we'll never consent to oppression. Now, when we look at the course of the world today, we can see that there are two paths before us. Either we'll deepen uncertainty through fear, through conflict and isolation or we'll build the future together through justice, solidarity and common will. Of course, it is easy to punch darkness. What is difficult is to light a candle that will dispel that darkness. Turkey has chosen the second path and hopefully will follow it with patience may god ease our way and be our guide and helper i pray i invite our friends listening to us in this very hall today and from every corner of the world to embrace this shared vision of the future I greet you all with the warmest of regards on my own behalf, on behalf of my people. Until we meet again, I salute you all once with respect. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the Republic of Turkey. Yeah. We give them sign too. I'm sure. Hi, what a pleasure. Yeah.
