The Assembly will hear an address by His Eminence Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Secretary of State of the Holy See. I request protocol to escort His Eminence and invite him to address the Assembly. This was the small feet of the sand and of the sand. You can use the sand and my feet and they're looking at it. Mr. President, I am honored to extend to you and to the distinguished representatives of the nations assembled here the warm greetings of His Holiness Pope Leo XIV, while also congratulating Your Excellency on your election as President of this esteemed Assembly. As the Secretary General, His Excellency Antonio Guterres, approaches the end of his term of office, I wish also to thank him for his service to the United Nations and wish him well. Mr. President, in a world marked by rapid technological change, environmental threats, renewed conflicts, and deepening fractures in the international order, However, this year's theme, Restoring Trust, Managing Transformation, a United Nations that delivers for all, is not merely aspirational, it is an urgent moral and political imperative. Every international institution beyond its legal framework requires mutual trust among its members to be effective. Moreover, trust is an ongoing process. Pope Leo identifies three essential words that must guide diplomacy, peace, justice, and truth. He warns against the return of a diplomacy of force and reaffirms the indispensable role of multilateral institutions. Mr. President, the human person remains the measure of all progress. At the earth of this conviction, start the acknowledgement of the inviolable God-given dignity of every human person. From this flows the sacredness of life, from conception to natural death, as well as the imperative to safeguard the human person, and that every society that aspires to be regarded as civilized has a duty to protect. Poblio addressed in his first encyclical letter the new technological challenge, which he does not reject, but calls for its ethical ordering. The control of these powerful tools must not remain in the hands of a select few. They must serve humanity, not the other way around. In particular, the development of lethal autonomous weapon system raises profound moral questions. In this critical domain, Pope Leo provides clear criteria for discernment. The first concerns personal responsibility. The second pertains to the moral time frame for making judgments. The third is the protection of civilians. These criteria give rise to certain non-negotiable requirements. First of all, systems used in worse settings must guarantee the possibility of retracing tracing and reconstructing decision-making processes so that accountability and blame are not collapsed into the machine. Second, the decision to use lethal force cannot be delegated to opaque or automated processes, but must remain under effective, self-aware and responsible human control. Finally, it is imperative to establish a shared framework, also at the international level, in order to curb the technological arms race and ensure robust protection for civilians and the infrastructures necessary for their survival. For some years now, the world has spiraled into violence that has progressively spread and intensified, continually opening up new theaters of war. The Holy See strongly emphasized the urgent need for an immediate and total cessation of hostility as a prerequisite for any serious engagement in restoring and building the future. At the same time, it is necessary to consider that peace is not a negative word, that is, the mere absence of war. Peace is first a gift, the gift of the risen Christ, yet an active and demanding gift. It is built in the heart of every person and is an integral part of the collective memory of every community as well as humanity's heritage. In the effort to restoring trust and peace, disarmament is therefore not an optional ideal, but a necessary vehicle. No true peace is possible without genuine common resolve for disarmament. Mr. President, the dignity of the person finds concrete expression in the fundamental human rights and freedoms, which are inviolable, since they are inherent in the human person and in human dignity. Particular attention must be paid to those categories of persons most at risk, those in the womb, the elderly, the disabled, the sick, refugees and migrants, the unemployed, the marginalized, the lonely, and those living under condition of extreme poverty, violence or conflict. Among these fundamental rights, religious freedom occupies a privileged place. It is not a secondary liberty, but an essential dimension of the human person. Tragically, Christians in many parts of the world continue to suffer discrimination, violence, and outright persecution. And while condemning all forms of religious discrimination, the Holy See raises its voice on behalf of these brothers and sisters, not in a spirit of exclusive advocacy, but because the defense of any one community's freedom strengthens the freedom of all. Mr. President, the passing of time does not make a war any less intolerable. Rather, it makes the responsibility of those who can end or help bring it to an end all the more grave. After more than four years of war in Ukraine, the death toll continues to rise. Faced with this tragedy, the Holy See, while calling for strict observance of the international humanitarian law, highlights the urgent necessity to bring hostilities to an end and paving way for diplomacy. The Holy See encourages every initiative aimed at achieving an immediate, complete, and effective ceasefire. The Holy See reiterates its call for an end to the ongoing violence against the Palestinian civilian population in the West Bank, particularly the escalation of hostilities, home demolition and movement restriction, driving the displacement of Palestinian communities. On the situation in Gaza, the Holy See remains concerned about the dire humanitarian crisis, the widespread destruction, mass displacement, and the severe persisting shortages. In this regard, urges the international community to work towards advancing the two-state solution with a view to bringing about a just and lasting peace. The Holy See welcomes the signing of the Trilateral Framework Agreement between the United States, Israel and Lebanon, aimed at stabilizing the southern borders of the Republic of Lebanon and achieving a just and lasting peace. This agreement in itself represents a significant development. However, the Holy See expresses serious concern regarding the difficulties encountered in its implementation and calls on the parties involved to respect fully and enforce the terms of the agreement through concrete actions. Respect for sovereignty and borders form the essential foundation for the implementation of the peace plan. Furthermore, the presence of Christians in Lebanon and throughout the Middle East must not only be safeguarded as the legitimate continuation of a historic presence, but must also be encouraged by international community, since Christians aspire to be an active force for peace, spirituality, and culture within the mosaic of people that make up the Levant where the Christian faith originated. The Olysee is following with deep concern the situation in the Gulf region, where the conflict has gradually spread and the violence shows no signs of abating. In particular, the Holy See cannot remain silent about the dramatic impact that this conflict is having on vulnerable civilian populations who are being driven into anger and forced displacement and who are living in barely sustainable conditions. This conflict has also affected vital infrastructure, maritime transport routes and energy resources that are of strategic importance to the entire global economy, which has an impact on the livelihood or persons all around the world. The Holy See strongly reiterates its appeal for the parties involved to find the courage to engage in dialogue. Only a renewed commitment to negotiation, supported by the international community, can restore the prospect of stable peace and shared development to the Gulf region. The international community must not forget the tragic plight of the hundreds of thousands of Rohingya, who for more than 90 years now suffer not only from the tragedy of state-eldenedness, but also have been subjected to inhumane and deadly circumstances. These individuals are deprived of their inherent rights. in fragrant disrespect of their human dignity. Their suffering must end. The condition must be created within their homeland to allow the safe, legal, voluntary and unhindered return. The Holy Syri news is heartfelt appeal for an immediate end to the conflict in Sudan, A land that has for too long been ravaged by indiscriminate violence affected the most defenseless, starting with children and women. Faced with an unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe, all parties are urged to initiate, without delay, a sincere and constructive dialogue with the support of the international community to facilitate assistance to the population and assure stability and peace. The Holy See appeals to all key figures in South Sudanese politics to prioritize the well-being of the nation over any partisan interests. Everyone, based on their own responsibility, is called upon to promote action and words that contribute to reconciliation, peace and harmony amongst all South Sudanese. The Holy See is following with deep concern the humanitarian crisis currently unfolding in certain areas of Somalia, where outbreaks of violence and extreme weather events are exacerbating the population's already precarious living conditions. The Holy See urges the international community to generally commit to meeting the immediate needs of the most at risk, especially women and children. The situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo is of concern to the Holy See, particularly the protected crisis in the east of the country and the Ebola epidemic. The Holy See, while expressing full support for the peace processes in the country, encourages national dialogue and call for the urgent protection of health and humanitarian workers, unimpeded access to aid, and the strengthening of regional cooperation to address these challenges in an integrated manner. Particular importance must be attached to reconciliation among communities, as it is an indispensable condition for a truly lasting peace. Furthermore, the Holy See is preoccupied by the terrorist attacks, especially in North Kivu and the Turk, which repeatedly target the civilian population, including Christian communities, involving killings, abduction, and the destruction of villages and church structures. The Holy See notes with concern the advance of Jihadist groups from the Sahel towards the coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea. The response cannot be exclusively military. It must include the prevention of radicalization, the development of border areas, the education of young people, social cohesion and interreligious dialogue, fully valuing the role of religious communities in preventing extremism. The province of Cabo del Gado in Mozambique remains destabilized after almost nine years of armed conflict. The Holy See, while calling for the end of the conflict, remains concerned about the sporadic episodes of violence which prevent internally displaced persons from returning to their place of origins and force them to continue living in a situation of suffering and food insecurity with no prospects of a better future. In Venezuela, the Holy See encourages every effort aimed at the full restoration of democratic order through peaceful, inclusive means that respect national sovereignty, as well as the launch of a process of national reconciliation based on dialogue, the pursuit of the common good, and full respect for human rights and civil liberties. In this context, the sometimes difficult situation faced by detainees in Venezuela, as well as the suffering endured by their families, continue to give rise to humanitarian concern and should not be overlooked. The same consideration applies to the pressing need for a sweeter recovery of the national economy, for the benefit of the entire population, the majority of which continues to endure extremely difficult living conditions. The Holy See continues to follow the situation in Haiti with great attention. The country is currently experiencing a period of serious political, institutional and social instability, as well as a dramatic humanitarian emergency. The Holy See encourages all Haitians to prioritize dialogue in the pursuit of the common good and renews its appeal to the international community to accompany the country with determination and generosity on its arduous journey towards peace democracy and their renewed confidence in the future the Holy See is closely monitoring the situation between Cuba and the United States and call in calls upon that those responsible to foster a sincere and effective dialogue so I us to avoid any action that might increase the suffering of the beloved Cuban people. The Holy See is following the situation in Nicaragua with particular concern and reiterates its constant appeal to pursue a path of respectable and constructive dialogue with the country's authorities for the good of the people and the church in the country. The Holy See encourages Azerbaijan and Armenia to consolidate the process of achieving a stable and lasting peace in the South Caucasus. Mr. President, the transformation the world is facing, technological, geopolitical, social, will not wait for the activity or inactivity of the United Nations. Whether it becomes a transformation that elevates the human person or one that diminishes it depends on the choices made together in these rooms. It is imperative to design not only weapons but the logic of domination, to protect the most in need, to speak the truth in charity and to rebuild through dialogue and solidarity a multilateral order that truly delivers for all. May the international community as the family of nations have the courage to restore trust, the wisdom to manage transformation justly, and the perseverance to build peace. In this regard, the Holy See strongly urges all parties to engage in sincere negotiation to put an end to all wars and conflicts. War brings only death and destruction, whereas peace brings development and prosperity. The Holy See will continue to play its part in building a better future for all. Thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the Secretary of State of the Holy See.
