The Assembly will now hear an address by Her Excellency Delci Eloyna Rodriguez Gomez, Acting President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. I request protocol to escort Her Excellency and invite her to address the Assembly. Thank you. A very good evening to you, distinguished President of the 81st Session of the United Nations General Assembly, distinguished heads of state, heads of government and heads of delegation. I have stood on this podium at various points in my life as a civil servant, first as the Minister of Foreign Affairs, then as Executive Vice President, and now as Acting President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. At all of these times, I have been compelled to reflect upon the major issues concerning humankind as well as their aspirations and concerns. These are peace, development, equality, the climate crisis, free trade, energy security and more recently, artificial intelligence. Where these challenges are concerned, Venezuela has always held and continues to hold very clear positions. 1. We adhere strictly to the notion of peace and repudiate violence. Understanding and dialogue must triumph over conflict. We firmly believe in the power of understanding and dialogue. Venezuela, who today knows exactly what it is to lift its children from the rubble, extend its solidarity, indeed its wholehearted solidarity, to all peoples suffering from war. We reaffirm in the most unambiguous terms here that peace, a just, lasting peace, underpinned by dignity for all parties, is not a naive ambition. Rather, it is the only truly humane solution to conflict. Our second unwavering stance, inclusive development with social justice to alleviate poverty and mitigate the suffering of hundreds of millions of people that are primarily located in the global south. We know that sanctions undermine economic and financial freedoms and hinder human development. Three, we believe in respecting the rights of nature. That is the only way in which we can duly consecrate human life. 4. Equally, the institutional failure of global trade is today patently clear because no nation can thrive in supranational systems which do not promote national industry and which prioritise outsourcing and award that strategy. Five, international stability means that we must resolve our three-pronged energy-like dilemma. We must at the same time guarantee security of supply, affordable prices and environmental sustainability. We must champion timelines for decarbonisation. But actually doing that in a forced or imposed way is a direct threat to food security, employment and production. We must avoid industrial collapses, the breakdown of production, and avoid energy costs which people cannot afford. As such, energy security is vital if we are to ensure the survival of the international economy and to buttress development. There is no doubt whatsoever that Venezuela plays and will play a crucial role in these international efforts. Here I wish to point to the recent agreement signed between the United States and Venezuela as one of the most all-encompassing and significant ever signed. It will contribute to ensuring the energy balance of the hemisphere and the well-being of our economy. I now wish to refer to artificial intelligence. It is a genuine technological revolution. What we're witnessing here is a milestone in terms of the transformation of humankind. If it is employed properly, it will bring about unprecedented development in healthcare, the environment, productive processes, and in the lives of human beings in general. Governments, the technology sector and the scientific community have the overwhelming responsibility to ensure that we do not stray from the constructive and vital purposes of AI. It must benefit the citizens. That is its overriding purpose and we must not widen the digital divide and digital inequality throughout the world. Seven, I would be remiss if I did not hear mention here as the very headquarters of international law our desire to reaffirm the historic rights of Venezuela over Guyana Ezequiel. Here I appeal to the Cooperative Republic of Guyana to resolve the issue and to return to negotiations as stipulated by the Geneva Agreement. Agreements which last the longest are those that emerge from bilateral negotiations. they last longer and function better than those imposed by external bodies. For those that are asking which side Venezuela stands on, there you have our stances and our guiding principles. We are on one side, that is the side of citizens of the world that are pursuing their happiness, their development and their freedom. A great deal is said about Venezuela. Many people opine about Venezuela. some attempt to interfere in the domestic affairs of Venezuela I come to this rostrum to talk to you about a Venezuela whose national life has been affected by a crisis that has disrupted political coexistence a crisis that disrupted national life and upset our relationships with the world interests alien to the common good of the Venezuelan people were pursued without our say-so. In 2026, Venezuela was forced to face two major painful tests to its life as a nation. One was the test that arose from the suffocation of its internal political life and a dispute with the United States of America, which was ratcheted up and became more extreme. Another test arose from nature's savagery. That was the double earthquake on the 24th of June. In spite of these life's bitter blows, as they were called by the poet César Vallejo, for all of Venezuela's people today, Venezuela is being reborn. The idea of our country being reborn is, if you like, the expression of our country's attitude, the attitude that it is assumed in the face of the aforementioned events. We are transforming our political relationships, and these are now rooted in dialogue, negotiations, and diplomacy. We wish to have with the United States, with our neighbors, and with all countries on the continent, relations with the international communities. We wish to rebuild them and maintain them. They must be rooted in respect and equality. I wish before the 81st General Assembly of the United Nations to thank President Donald Trump and his government for their readiness to resume the course of diplomatic relations and cooperation with Venezuela. The last time that two presidents, the president of Venezuela and the United States, met together was in 2009. Today we are working solemnly to, through dialogue, settle our differences. But first and foremost, we are working to pave the way for cooperation in the field of energy, to promote security and to fight together transnational crime. and we're looking to buttress economic cooperation for the benefit of our two peoples and the peoples of our continent and the continent as a whole. Elsewhere, we are looking to ensure the material, moral and spiritual recovery of our homeland that has been beset by a devastating natural disaster. I wish to thank all of the countries of America, Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East as well as the United Nations system as a whole. I wish to thank you all. You provided your solidarity and your support to the Venezuelan people during the darkest hours of our history that we endured as a result of this double earthquake. Here, Venezuela felt the real spirit that inspired the creation of this organization. I come to you before this assembly as one more daughter of Venezuela to present the aspirations of a country that is seeking to rebuild its own destiny following political conflicts and economic models that were imposed that affected our development. For all too long we were a divided country. We were a country in which the colour of a party flag held more weight than the common surname that we all share. that is the name Venezuelan. This stage must conclude to usher in a new political era based in truth, justice, and the ability to look forward together and to find in political dialogue underpinned by respect a genuine forum within which we can settle the differences which we have as Venezuelans, seeking always in so doing to forge ahead for the well-being of the country. I am delighted to announce that Venezuela has begun a process of democratic transition to ensure its rebirth. This is an orderly, institutional and verifiable process to build a country that is freer for all, more prosperous and more at peace with itself. This is a process of political, economic and spiritual change and a time of structural reforms to ensure Venezuela's rebirth, the rebirth of our nation and our people. We are seeking here to build a country in which no one has to win by riding roughshod over someone else or ignoring them because all of us, particularly young people that are entering political life for the first time, are Venezuela. We must aspire to a Venezuela whose political class is deeply committed to national interests, placing them above anything else. And this political class must not be held hostage by media algorithms. I know Venezuela intimately. I thank God for the opportunity he has provided me with to experience institutional forums which exist within various sectors of public life. I know where the doors are, doors that must open to usher in a wholesale transformation of Venezuela. and doors through which we must walk to establish new bases for an economy which serves development at a national level, and what we must do to ensure full justice for all, regardless of social or political class. And I know what we must do to develop a justice system and a system of social equality as foreseen by the father of our liberation, Simon Bolivar, in Augusta Sura. I want us to arise from the rubble and establish the foundations of a new, diverse, deeply spiritual nation, a new republic which is at peace from itself. However, the world is increasingly less integrated and more polarized. The world has taught that some of the most solid democratic transitions of the modern world were not born from fracture or breakdowns, but from a transformation spearheaded with iron resolve by institutions themselves. This is our inspiration. We do not seek to reproduce a trajectory which belongs to another nation or the past, but we want to move forward on the basis of a universal idea. abiding by the law can serve as a path towards better, stronger law. A nation cannot only be reborn by rebuilding buildings, it is reborn when it rebuilds trust in its institutions. Consequently, I wish to announce and reaffirm in unambiguous terms the pillars of this process. One, there will be an orderly legal transition and a transition of the judiciary. We have embarked upon an institutional review process to ensure the state can grow stronger and to provide legal security which national and international investors require. But it is also required by our citizens. They must not feel trampled upon and dictated to by arbitrary powers. The judiciary must be at their service. We cannot postpone this process. There needs to be the responsible exercise of politics. Venezuela will guarantee that there can be real participation of all political forces in the country in political life. Democracy is not measured by the very existence of elections. Democracy is measured by the quality of the competition which occurs before the election. An election must serve as a solution, not a generator of irreconcilable conflicts. I wish to say the following loud and clear at this General Assembly. In Venezuela, there will be elections. and in that vein we have begun a political dialogue with sectors of the opposition which will lead to a process where everyone will compete on an equal footing. The Venezuelan people with its age-old wisdom will determine when the correct time for these elections is and Venezuelan institutions will be prepared to guarantee this inclusive and transparent process takes place. ours will be a country that is not submitted to economic restrictions of any kind so that our right to development can be guaranteed. These knee-jerk reactions that we see from outside the country will be consigned to the theatre of the past, which as Venezuelans we no longer wish to see. Venezuela must abandon the course which allowed extremism and intolerance to be imposed on and to prevail over peaceful and democratic coexistence. And here I ask for the support of the international community so that it in good faith supports the changes that Venezuela requires. It must respect the self-determination of my country. Venezuela wishes to breathe freely, exercise its rights as a sovereign nation without any type of interference. that Venezuela must be admired and respected. I come here and will do just this going forward. That is, I will assume a historic responsibility. That is the responsibility of taking Venezuela from uncertainty and conflict to a full democracy which is recognized by its own people and the world. This will be a new era of well-being from which Venezuela will be reborn. To my beloved people, I wish to say this is not the end of a speech, it is the beginning of a commitment. I wish to say to the international community, Venezuela is ready to walk hand in hand with those that believe in respectful international relations, relationships which exist without prejudice or interference. I wish to say the following to my young people, people that have grown up in a fractured country and which often decided to leave in search of what they couldn't find in our country. I wish to say to them that it is worth believing in the country once more. It is the time to rebuild the country that many wish to return to. We want it to be a country that they want to return to and not just one they want to flee from. I wish to say to all the Venezuelans who suffered the material and human losses of the earthquake, If they're wondering if it's worth carrying on, I say yes, it is. The strength of a people is not measured in easy times, but rather at times like these. We live many a catastrophe as a nation, but we have always emerged more united than we were before it was unleashed. To the Venezuelan people, I say the following. I do not promise you an easy way forward. The country's recovery will take time. Rebuilding our national soul will be our priority. Let us walk united as one nation that decided in the wake of pain to choose hope. May this political and geopolitical juncture go down in history as the time at which we decided to get back on our feet together, to rise up and to allow Venezuela's rebirth. On the 16th of December, we will mark 200 years since the anguished appeal of the father of our freedom, Simon Bolivar. He spoke to them to save them from dissolution, division and civil war. He said, Venezuelans, you will be consulted so that you can say when, where and according to which terms you wish to convene the great national convention. There our people will exercise fully their power. There we will establish our fundamental laws. Only a man can know his worth and be the master of his own fate. An all-powerful individual, a party or a faction cannot be that figure. only a people is sovereign no all powerful individual no party, no faction must prevail we will all work together we must pool our strength to ensure the rebirth of our homeland the homeland that our daughters and our sons deserve, may God bless Venezuela the union of our people must be the flag that we hold high we will rebuild a Venezuela that is dignified and which can forge ahead along its own path. Thank you. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the acting president of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
