The Assembly will now hear an address by His Excellency Thao Lung, General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam and President of the Social Republic of Vietnam. I request protocol to escort His Excellency and to invite him to address the Assembly. Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. The world is undergoing profound shift in the international order with many risks and uncertainties. The tendency towards the threat or use of force and the arms race, especially the modernization of nuclear weapons and the development of new technology weapons, are heightening the risk of confrontation, miscalculation, conflict, and even of large-scale wars. At the same time, the global economy is becoming increasingly fragmented amid mounting barriers to trade investment and technology. Supply chain disruptions and economic instability are narrowing development opportunities for many countries. Climate change, natural disasters, pandemics and emerging technological risk continue to pose direct threats to the lives of the people and their livelihoods and to the development and stability of many nations. The shift in the balance of power and development inequalities are placing growing strains on international relations. instability is further exacerbated when competition goes unchecked, commitments are left unfulfilled and international law is applied selectively, and erosion of trust is further impeding efforts at cooperation. What should concern us is not only how the international order is changing, but where that change will take the world. Change is inevitable, for it is part of the objective course of history. However, conflict and confrontation are not inevitable. from our own history vietnam understands the cost of war the value of independence and the power of reconciliation and corporation it is therefore my belief that the theme of this session restoring trust managing transformation an u n that delivers for all aptly reflects the urgent demands of the term From the losses of the Second World War, humanity created the UN with the aspiration to prevent wars, safeguard peace, promote cooperation, and place relations among nations on the foundation of common principles. Over the past eight decades, despite its limitations, the UN has helped sustain dialogue, advance decolonization, uphold the right of peoples to self-determination, and support development. This must be preserved and carried forward. Our institutions must be reformed to keep pace with the times, while fundamental principles of the UN Charter must be respected and reinforced. What we seek is a more equitable, democratic and inclusive international order where every country has a voice and every nation has the opportunity to develop. The mission of our generation is to help shape and manage change so that competition does not turn into confrontation, differences do not lead to conflict, and advances in science and technology do not create new divides. In this spirit, I wish to put forward four key priorities. First, we must restore trust among nations on the basis of respect for the UN Charter and International Law. The UN Charter and international law form the foundation for the international order. They must be respected fully, consistently and without selectivity. All states must respect each other's independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and right to choose their own path of development, refrain from interference in internal affairs and refrain from the threat or use of force inconsistent with the UN Charter. Restoring trust does not require countries to erase differences, but rather to manage such differences responsibly. Crisis must be prevented, competition must be kept under control, and dialogue must be sustained. Major powers should lead by example in respecting international law, exercising restraint and responsibly addressing common challenges, and the UN must remain at the heart of these efforts. In every conflict, civilians must be protected, international humanitarian law must be respected, and humanitarian access must be ensured. Vietnam supports the rise of the Palestinian people to self-determination and the two-state solution with an independent state of Palestine living peacefully alongside the state of Israel, in line with international law and relevant UN resolutions. In the Asia-Pacific, nearly six decades of the ASEAN's development have demonstrated that countries can transform suspicion into trust, confrontation into dialogue, division into cooperation and individual strength into collective might. In that spirit, Vietnam remains steadfast in its commitment to resolving disputes including those in the East Sea by peaceful means in line with international law, particularly the 1982 UNCLOS. Vietnam is resolute in safeguarding its sovereignty, sovereign rights and jurisdiction. The seas and oceans must remain spaces of peace, cooperation, connectivity and sustainable development. In this same spirit of peace and respect for people's rights to development, Vietnam has always stood in solidarity with the state and people of Cuba. We call upon the U.S. to end the unilateral embargo and insunctions and the energy blockade against Cuba and remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism. We also call upon the international community to support Cuba in overcoming the sanction-induced crisis. Second, we must advance development that is equitable, humane, inclusive and sustainable. International commitments must be translated into action and bring people's lives of peace, security, dignity and happiness. It is for this reason that the Pact for the Future and the 2030 Agenda, our promises to present and future generations, must be implemented earnestly and in full. Commitments on financing for development, including the SEVIA commitment, must be translated into concrete measures, expanding access to long-term financing at affordable cost, supporting countries burdened by debt, and amplifying the voice of developing countries in international financial and monetary institutions. The multilateral trading system must be strengthened in an open, equitable and transparent manner, ensuring development opportunities for all countries. Climate action must be accorded its rightful place in development cooperation, particularly via adaptation finance, technology transfer and a just energy transition. Development must be people-centered and leave no one behind. Growth must go hand-in-hand with social progress and equity, environmental protection and the safeguarding of people's livelihoods, especially for vulnerable countries and communities. Global progress must uphold the spirit of humanity in relations among nations, safeguard their legitimate interests and respect differences in history, culture and development conditions. Third, we must proactively shape technology governance so that progress serves humanity in our common development. Science, technology, digital transformation and artificial intelligence are opening up unprecedented opportunities, but they are also presenting new challenges. The future of technology does not automatically guarantee equitability, and technological progress must help narrow divides and expand development opportunities, rather than creating new forms of dependency or new sources of conflict. We need to develop inclusive, safe, transparent and accountable principles and governance frameworks to ensure that technologies will be in service of the people while respecting national sovereignty, digital sovereignty, and the right to development. Developing countries must be able to participate substantively in rulemaking, receive support for infrastructure and digital capacity, and enjoy equitable access to the benefits of scientific and technological progress. Vietnam's hosting of the signing ceremony for the UN Convention Against Cybercrime in Hanoi last year reflects our desire to make substantive contributions to global digital cooperation. Vietnam stands ready to work with partners to strengthen cooperation and build capacity in preventing and combating cybercrime so that people may live safely and benefit from technological progress. We also stand ready to support international initiatives on green and digital transformation and the development of effective governance frameworks so that science and technology can truly become drivers of shared development. Fourth, we must strengthen multilateralism and the essential, indispensable role of the UN. The strength of the UN does not lie in its ability to replace the responsibilities of state, but in its legitimacy and capacity to build consensus, establish norms, develop rules and mobilize global efforts to address common challenges. for the UN to adapt to the transformations of the time. Vietnam supports efforts to reform the organization, particularly the GA, the Security Council and the Secretariat, with a view to enhance an effectiveness prioritizing structural reform and streamlining the apparatus while fully harnessing the UN's advantage in advancing global agendas and safeguarding the interests of developing countries. These perspectives are drawn from the experience of Vietnam itself. Over the past half-century, since its accession to the UN mirrors the transformation of our own country. From primarily a recipient of invaluable assistance during the years of Đôi Mới, Vietnam today is making proactive contributions to our common endeavours, while deepening and broadening our substantive relations with the UN. Vietnamese military personnel and police officers have served and will continue to serve in UN peacekeeping operations, carrying our nation's aspiration for peace to places where peace remains fragile. Our tradition of independence and severance provides a foundation for Vietnam to strengthen its strategic autonomy and proactively pursue international integration, looking towards our goal of becoming a developing country with a modern industrial base and upper-middle income by 2030 and a developed high-income country by 2045. Vietnam is establishing a new development model based on productivity, quality and added value, with science, technology, innovation and digital transformation as key drivers with economic growth, closely linked to cultural development, social progress and equity and environmental protection. Autonomy also means proactively adapting and cooperating with the world on an equal footing. Vietnam therefore pursues a consistent foreign policy of independence, autonomy, self-reliance, peace, friendship, cooperation and development, and of multilateralization and diversification of external relations. Vietnam will remain steadfast in upholding the UN Charter and international law, promoting dialogue on the peaceful settlement of disputes and deepening its participation in UN peacekeeping missions. Vietnam is working with fellow ASEAN member States to build an united, self-reliant and resilient ASEAN and actively preparing to host APEC in 2027. And as a member of the UN Human Rights Council, Vietnam champions dialogue and cooperation in promoting and protecting human rights and in ensuring that all can share the fruits of development. We stand ready to share our experience in poverty reduction, agricultural development and climate change adaptation to work with partners to broaden cooperation for common interest. The world will continue to change. The direction for such change will depend on the choices we make and the responsibilities we shoulder today. Vietnam chooses peace, cooperation and development. We will work steadfastly with all countries to strengthen the UN, uphold international law and translate our shared commitments into tangible benefits for our people. We believe that with a strong UN, together we can build a more peaceful, equitable, inclusive and better world for all. And on this journey, Vietnam will remain an active member, a reliable partner and a responsible nation, always standing ready to contribute to the common endeavors of the international community. Thank you very much. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish to thank the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam and the President of the Social Republic of Vietnam. We shall now continue the general debate.
