I now give the floor to His Excellency Ronald Ozzie Lamola, Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa. President of the 81st session of the United Nations General Assembly, the Secretary General, ladies and gentlemen, This day, the 24th of September, is a national day of immense significance in South Africa. We call it Heritage Day. It is a day upon which we recommit to not just a united but also a diverse nation. A day where we reassert that diversity is not a cause for division but for celebration. Our strength is in our diversity. In that spirit, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you in my mother tongue. Thank you. On behalf of the Republic of South Africa, I congratulate you on your elections to preside over the 81st General Assembly. I assure you of our full support as we discharge your important responsibilities. At the same time, Mr. President, with this being the valedictory UN General Assembly, session for the Secretary General Antonio Guterres, permit me to salute him for his numerous accomplishments at a time of his unprecedented global challenges. Sixty years ago, in the Chamber of this Assembly, the United Nations adopted a resolution condemning apartheid as a crime against humanity. The demise of apartheid freed the people of South Africa from racial segregation and slaughter, domination and deprivation, humiliation and exploitation. But it was not only the people of South Africa who were unchanged when apartheid collapsed. The end of apartheid also marked the end of a system that exported violence and instability across southern Africa. Indeed, the fall of apartheid is a glorious story that attests to what multilateralism can deliver. Since democratic South Africa took its place in this assembly, we have pursued a foreign policy anchored in Ubuntu and international law, dialogue and multilateralism, and in the understanding that our fate is tied to the fortunes of our region and the continent as a whole. Millions more South Africans have access to education, electricity, water and sanitation, housing and social protection than they did at the dawn of our democracy or under apartheid. We've built a united nations of diverse people, stilled in their determination to never let history repeat itself. We have built a vibrant democracy capable of self-correcting and stepping back from the brink. A democracy strong enough to withstand and resist attempts at external supervision and tutelage. After the 2024 elections, political parties put national stability above narrow interest and formed a government of national unity within two weeks of the announcement of the results. And since the dawn of our democracy, we have held no fewer than seven free and fair national elections. As we speak, South Africans are preparing once again to exercise their democratic right, this time in the local government elections on the 4th of November, 2026. Again, the will of the people will prevail. The promise of democracy and international cooperation wanes when we cannot demonstrate that they can address inequality and insecurity. Compelled by our inevitable position as the world's most unequal society, South Africa made inequality a key focus of our G20 presidency in 2025. Today, the top 10% own roughly 75% of global wealth, while the bottom 50% own only 2%. This extreme concentration of wealth at the top and poverty at the bottom is neither inevitable nor insurmountable. Together with Brazil, Norway, Spain, South Africa calls on this assembly to throw its weight behind the establishment of an international panel on inequality We know that inequality is at the heart of the rising appeal of politics founded on hate and exclusion Across the world, citizens who have seen little improvement in their economic fortunes are turning to ideas diametrically opposed to the values of the UN Charter. As we mark the 25th anniversary of the Deben Declaration and the Programme of Action, South Africa reaffirms its commitment to confronting racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and all forms of intolerance. We are determined to confront racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia, and all forms of intolerance through our constitution, our laws, and our institutions. Dealing with the root causes and challenges of irregular migration is a shared responsibility of all countries of the world. We approach our leadership of a regional bloc that is home to a quarter of Africa's population, the South African Development Community, The Southern African Development Community, with a firm resolve to champion greater regional integration, industrialization and trade. We want to increase trade amongst our countries so that our citizens can share in the prosperity of our region and our economies are better prepared to absorb the shocks of unilateralism. If multilateralism works at the regional level, then citizens have greater reasons to believe it can work globally. Our governments face a difficult choice whether to meet the needs of their citizens or certify the expectations of creditors. In the last year alone, African countries spent roughly the same amount on servicing debt as it needed to close our infrastructure financing gap. This grim reality inspired South Africa's G20 presidency to focus on debt sustainability. The Africa Expect Panel report calls for an end to incrementalism. It supports multilateralist efforts to establish a borrower's club, to counterbalance the power of creditors and calls for greater debt transparency and greater scrutiny of credit rating agencies. To us, Mr. President, unsustainable debt betrays the promise of development and destroys the prospects for democracy. With only 36% of the sustainable development goals showing sufficient progress, we are running out of time. Africa and March of the Global South need multilateral actions to free resources absorbed by debt services and redirect them towards development. We must close the financing gap for the 2030 Agenda and meaningful advanced implementation of the Africa's Union Agenda 2063. In November 2025, South Africa classified gender-based violence and femicide as a national disaster, recognizing that dealing with this couch demands exceptional measures from our population, and we require international partners to continue to fight this through technology and other means that must support our measures to fight gender-based violence in our country. Climate disasters and extreme weather patterns threatens our people, our prosperity and our hard-won development gains. In the last year, 2 million people in the southern African development community suffered a combined and debilitating impact of floods, cyclones, wildfires and disease outbreaks. Our responses are severely constrained by a climate finance architecture stacked against developing nations. Global action on disaster resilience and predictable financing for a just energy transition is essential if international cooperation is to deliver for all. Our continent has the worst largest reserves of critical minerals. These critical minerals can help bridge the gap between wealth and poor nations and overcome the indignities of poverty and underdevelopment We insist, Mr. President, that indeed Africa must have a stake in shaping the rules that govern the development and the deployment of artificial intelligence We have a youthful population ready to play a key role in the beneficiation and source of critical minerals and research and innovations for artificial intelligence. Restoring trust in multilateralism demands that we demonstrate as the United Nations that peaceful resolutions of conflicts is still our mantra. Unfortunately, much of what we see runs counter to this. In the last two years, the world spent more on military budgets than on resourcing this important board tasked with maintaining global peace. We are reminded that meeting the SDGs by 2030, including ending hunger and expanding access to safe water and sanitation, will require not more than 5% of the US$2.9 trillion spent on arms. The results of the choice we are making is an arms race and a world as divided as it is dangerous. We see the consequences in Sudan, which is today the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. We see also the consequences in the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, in Iran, Ukraine, and elsewhere. Humanitarian workers are caught in the crossfires of today's conflict. When they are not being obstructed from reaching civilians in need, they are being killed in the line of duty. to restore respect for international law, we must protect those who deliver humanitarian assistance. That is why South Africa endorsed the declaration for the protection of humanitarian personnel supported by nearly 120 states from all regions of the world. Mr. President, eight years ago, the first resolution of the General Assembly called for the elimination of nuclear weapons. Later this year, South Africa will preside over the first review conference of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. As the only country in the world to have voluntarily dismantled its nuclear weapons program, South Africa stands ready to share this experience as a demonstration that, with political will, credible and verifiable nuclear disarmament is achievable. In our view, restoring trust in multilateralism will not happen without meaningful reform of global governance, principally the UN Security Council. African citizens are growing wary of their continents being consigned to the periphery of global governance. Africa is home to nearly one-fifth of the world's population, and African countries together account for more than a quarter of the UN member states. Yet over the past decade, 70% of UN Security Council resolutions have concerned conflicts on the African continent If the future belongs to the young, then surely a continent that will be home to one in four of the world's youth by 2030 deserves a bigger seat at the table South Africa therefore reaffirms its support for the EZULU-NIC consensus in its call to end Africa's relegation to the margin of global decision-making. A permanent seat for Africa in the Security Council, with all the prerogatives of the permanent memberships, is long overdue. Nowhere is the need to uphold our shared humanity more urgent than in Palestine. The rights and dignity and humanity of the Palestinians cannot be treated as conditional. The State of Israel's continued violation of international and humanitarian law constitutes genocide, and we remain steadfast in our view that international community must act decisively to end this impunity. In our support of a just and a lasting peace and a two-state solution, in accordance with the UN resolution, South Africa is unwavering. We are steadfast in our long-standing solidarity with the people of Western Sahara. We reaffirm their ineligible right to self-determination and support a just, lasting, and a mutual acceptable political solution consistent with international law and the principles of the UN Charter. We are also deeply concerned by the wielding of economic weapons to coerce countries into abandoning their chosen developmental trajectories. The suffering of the Cuban people should command our deepest solidarity. We reiterate our call for an end to the blockade on the Cuban people. The designation of Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism is similarly unfounded and should be removed from that list. Unilateral cohesive measures have negative spillover effects that seriously undermine third countries. Similarly, we also call for the urgent removal of sanctions against Zimbabwe Our current reality demands that we act collectively to protect existing international institutions of justice from sanctions and intimidations, such as the International Criminal Court These institutions fulfill important mandates for the benefit of all humanity South Africa leaves this podium with an important refrain The South African nation is the creation of the heritage of the international community. South Africa today stands tall in the family of nations because the United Nations delivered on the promise of its charter, who are a living example and legacy of the charter of the United Nations. As member states, we must continue to support this organization, our organization, because, as former President Nelson Mandela said in his inaugural address to the United Nations General Assembly on the 3rd of October 1994, and I quote, The millions across our globe who stand expected at the gates of hope look to these organizations to bring them peace, to bring them life, to bring them a life worth living. Close quote. I thank you very much. I thank the Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa.
