It is with a very special sense of honour that I address all the participants in the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly, which is taking place within a very worrisome international context, in which tensions in international relations are worsening owing to the multiplicity of conflicts of different natures and intensities in various areas of our planet. It is naturally understandable that, in the face of such a high level of instability and insecurity, it is much more difficult to achieve the principal Sustainable Development Goals and other goals of the Organization, with a view to attaining all the targets that we have set out.
I would like to extend a special greeting to His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang and congratulate him on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, which takes on special significance for the entire African continent and his country, the Republic of Cameroon, where he has effectively discharged his duties with demonstrable dedication, and which places him in a position to successfully guide the proceedings of this session. Allow me to sincerely wish him every success in carrying out those functions, with the belief that his commitment will make an important contribution to strengthening the role of the Organization as a decisive and irreplaceable actor in global governance. I also congratulate the outgoing President, His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis, to whom I express our great appreciation for the way in which he carried out his work and for what he has achieved during his term of office. I would also like to praise and commend Secretary-General António Guterres on his outstanding dedication to our common cause of building a world of peace, security, harmony, concord, development and equal opportunities for all. We value his work all the more as he is carrying it out in a complex global context, full of challenges and threats, which he has successfully addressed with pragmatism, responsibility and great wisdom and courage.
Since the founding of the United Nations, after the end of the Second World War, the people of our planet have longed for peaceful coexistence at the global level, with the belief that events that could jeopardize harmony, peace and universal security would be the object of careful attention and preventive measures taken within the framework of the Organization so that they would not degenerate into conflicts and wars that would revive the traumatic experiences of the period from 1939 to 1945. After almost eight decades, we can objectively observe today that not only has that goal not been realized, but we seem to be moving away from the founding purposes of the United Nations. In view of that reality, we need to consider where we have failed and what collective measures we should take to make the United Nations actions more effective in the search for solutions that contribute to conflict prevention, strengthen world peace and security, boost trade and international cooperation in order to ensure the prosperity of nations and the well-being of the people of our planet. Today we are witnessing an attempt to undermine, ignore and even replace the role and importance of the United Nations in resolving the major issues that afflict humankind, particularly those related to universal peace and security. In that regard, there is no more appropriate stage than the General Assembly to undo that situation and acknowledge the urgent need to reform this institution, while placing special emphasis on adapting the Security Council to the realities of the contemporary world. Its current format and composition continue to reflect the reality of the post-war period and have become obsolete with the passage of time and the development of other world regions — many of which comprised colonized countries that are now independent Members of the United Nations.
The reform of the Security Council and of international financial institutions based on the Bretton Woods system is urgently needed in order to give a voice to the countries of the global South, namely, those in Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent. The imperative of multilateralism must prevail as the only framework truly capable of safeguarding the common interests of all humankind, within which we must reaffirm our resolute commitment to diplomacy, inclusive dialogue and the use of peaceful means to resolve conflicts. It is in that spirit that the Republic of Angola is deeply committed to the process of finding solutions to conflicts in Africa, while noting that currently the greatest effort has been focused on the conflict prevailing in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, without neglecting those taking place in the Sudan and the Sahel region. As part of the Luanda process, a ceasefire was reached in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which came into force on 4 August. In order to consolidate the gains made, a draft peace agreement was proposed by the Republic of Angola, involving the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Rwanda, the terms of which are being discussed by the parties at the ministerial level, aimed at reaching a mutual understanding to convene a summit-level meeting to seal the signing of a final peace agreement and the re-establishment of relations between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
We are deeply concerned about the situation in the Sudan, where a violent war is being waged with dramatic humanitarian consequences in the face of a certain apathy on the part of the international community, which must seek to pool its efforts and act in coordination with the African Union to foster and achieve lasting peace. We are providing, for the benefit of peace in Africa, Angola’s experience in resolving its internal conflict, which, after several decades, was definitively resolved through inclusive dialogue between the warring parties. We have learned from our own conflict that there is no peace without dialogue, and no peace without concessions on both sides. That is a path that cannot be ignored in the context of all efforts to resolve the serious security crises facing the world today.
Russia’s war against Ukraine has seriously and profoundly shaken stability and security in Europe, with serious repercussions for the rest of the world in terms of economic stability and food and energy security. We have witnessed the worrisome continuous escalation of the conflict, which has had devastating effects on the internal situation of the warring countries, owing to the use of increasingly lethal weapons, without any prospect of a solution to that complex issue. Although increasingly sophisticated military and other means are being deployed in the theatre of operations, no military victory is in sight in that war, which is likely to spread to the rest of Europe, unless a negotiated solution is found, based on respect for the principles of the United Nations, which safeguard the sovereignty of States and the indivisibility and territorial integrity of countries.
Failure to uphold the principles of the Charter of the United Nations is the root cause of many of the problems and tensions that proliferate all over our planet, where particular geopolitical interests and ambitions, contrary to the values advocated by the international community, often affect the security and stability of entire regions of our planet. In the Middle East, we witnessed and have condemned the killing and kidnapping of defenceless Israeli civilians on 7 October 2023. As a result, although Israel has the right to protect its territory, to guarantee the safety of its citizens and to try to rescue hostages whose whereabouts are still unknown, it should do everything it can to prevent the genocide that the world is witnessing live in the Gaza Strip, as well as the attacks by settlers and the expansion of settlements in the West Bank. In that conflict, the main victims are defenceless and vulnerable human beings, namely, children, women, the elderly and the sick. They are killed indiscriminately not only owing to aerial bombs and artillery, but also because they are prevented — through the force of arms — from accessing and enjoying the most basic rights, such as access to food, drinking water, medicines, housing and medical assistance, owing to the destruction of key infrastructure, such as schools, hospitals, housing, energy and others.
We are witnessing an alarming number of deaths of journalists from international networks, United Nations employees and workers from international humanitarian organizations, which is unacceptable and condemnable. We cannot continue to allow that in just 11 months, in a small territory with no escape, nearly 43,000 people have been killed, and the perpetrators have not been held accountable by the international community. The international community cannot remain indifferent to that situation which threatens the existence of the Palestinian people, who have the same right to live in peace and security in the territory of their ancestors as the Jewish people do. We are concerned about the spread of the conflict to other countries, because it threatens peace and security throughout the Middle East and opens up the dangerous possibility of the direct involvement of the major world Powers and thus the internationalization of the conflict with all the possible consequences on a global scale. That is a fact that once again highlights the role of the United Nations, its decisions and resolutions, which, if strictly and rigorously upheld, will resolve the impasse surrounding the creation of the sovereign State of Palestine, the only way to put a definitive end to the problem that the Middle East has been facing for decades.
I would like to take this opportunity to call once again for an end to the embargo against Cuba and the sanctions against Zimbabwe, the current Chair of our regional economic community, the Southern African Development Community (SADC), because they are unjust and inhumane, increase the suffering of their peoples and greatly hinder the economic and social development of those countries.
As part of the collective effort undertaken by the nations of our planet to consolidate peace, African countries have sought to make an increasingly effective contribution to United Nations missions aimed at bringing stability to countries and regions in conflict. Often, those peace operations are not carried out within the time frame and with the effectiveness required owing to the financial constraints of the countries willing to participate. Fortunately, that constraint seems to have finally been overcome at the Security Council level, which represents a decisive step in strengthening the operationality and effectiveness of the peacebuilding missions led by the African Union, which now has a financing mechanism more suitable to its operations. I warmly welcome those developments, especially because Africa wants to be increasingly present not only in the discussion, but also in the decision-making and resolution processes regarding major global issues.
We intend to be part of the construction of a new international financial architecture, in which closer cooperation among States is essential, with a view to effectively fighting the illicit flow of capital and the recovery of assets, which is often incomprehensibly hampered by the countries that hold the funds under their control, even without plausible justification. It is important to note that funds that come from asset recovery processes have a direct effect on the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and, consequently, on improving the general living conditions of our populations. Angola has made significant progress in the fight against corruption, with specific cases of citizens who have been tried and convicted who saw their assets forfeited in favour of the State, by virtue of the sentences handed down in court and confirmed by the competent courts of appeal. As regards asset recovery, we have had two success stories, in which the United Kingdom authorities demonstrated a very responsible attitude and respect for our sovereignty, returning to Angola $2.5 billion that were sitting in a bank in London. It is befitting to publicly acknowledge that from this global forum. Unfortunately, not all the countries that agreed to accept the proceeds from corruption without questioning their origins at the time today respect the rulings of our courts, which are binding. Some of those countries even claim the right to question the credibility of our courts, almost wanting to review the judgments issued by them, as if they were extraterritorial appellate bodies. Those assets are the property of our States, which were already impoverished during the colonial period. We will therefore continue to fight with all our strength for the recovery of the assets embezzled from the public treasury, which are sorely needed for the construction of infrastructure, such as schools, hospitals, energy and water facilities and roads, among others.
The Republic of Angola advocates the urgent implementation of reforms that will lead to a fairer representation of African countries within the main international financial institutions, in order to advocate decision- and policy-making that impacts the daily lives of the populations of the countries concerned. We are firmly committed to leaving no one behind, acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations. In line with that motto of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly, we must mobilize efforts, capacities and all the resources at our disposal to promote policies, measures and programmes that make it possible to achieve the intentions contained therein.
The Republic of Angola is making a great effort to set the country on the path to progress and development, based on policies that establish priorities contained in the national development plan, which has as its main pillars the diversification of the economy, the reduction of public debt, the mobilization of domestic revenue, the optimization of public spending in the priority areas of health and education and the implementation of specific social protection programmes. The tasks that we have set ourselves in those areas are complex and require time and sufficiently skilled human resources for them to be carried out successfully. Nevertheless, we are making encouraging progress, the benefits of which will be felt over time.
Among the successful initiatives, I would like to mention the construction of water transfer systems for the areas heavily affected by drought in southern Angola, where poverty and misery are making way for the prospect of prosperity and a more dignified life for the people, who can now count on having enough water available to transform arid areas into areas for agricultural production and animal husbandry, without the risks that used to jeopardize human and animal survival. As part of the Government of Angola’s action to improve the national social framework and create factors that boost the development of industry and agriculture, we have embarked on the path of electrifying the country in all its latitudes. We have invested in clean energy production, with the construction of large hydroelectric dams and photovoltaic parks, meaning that 67 per cent of the country’s energy matrix already comes from clean sources and with plans for the thermal power stations still in operation to be phased out in the next three years.
In terms of clean energy production, in addition to the more than 6,500 megawatts that we produce today, we are building the Caculo Cabaça hydroelectric dam, which will produce more than 2,000 megawatts, and we will soon begin construction of the country’s largest photovoltaic park, with funding of $1.5 billion from the American EXIM Bank, to supply off-grid power to a considerable number of towns in the provinces of Huíla, Cunene, Namibe and Cuando Cubango. With those additional energy production projects under way, our main focus at the moment is on public investment and public-private partnerships to build high- and medium-voltage transmission lines to the east and south of the country, with a view to interconnecting with the SADC network to the east via Zambia and to the south via Namibia. We currently have a considerable supply of electricity production, which requires transport and distribution networks to take it to potential beneficiaries in all parts of the country and to the countries of southern Africa, which need that resource for their development. Interested investors now have the opportunity to sell electricity produced in Angola to customers in the mining areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia and to SADC countries in general, with South Africa being the largest industrial and domestic consumer.
Angola is developing a series of initiatives that are part of the effort to ensure the implementation of the international climate agenda, highlighting measures aimed at mitigating and adapting to climate change, always taking care to exploit our fossil resources responsibly in order to guarantee the development and well-being of our populations. It is important to highlight the great public investment that Angola has been making in the health sector throughout the country, with the rapid construction of well-equipped hospital infrastructure at all three levels of care and with an ambitious programme for training and recruiting health professionals for our national health system.
Nowadays, one of the main priorities for the African continent is development based on promoting and stepping up trade, for which it is essential to build infrastructure that guarantees connectivity among African countries and the mobility of economic operators and encourages free trade between them, within the framework of the African Continental Free Trade Area. With that in mind, the Republic of Angola has established partnerships at the international level to ensure the operationalization of the Benguela railway and the Lobito mineral and commercial ports as part of the major transnational transport and logistics project of the Lobito Corridor, which will ensure the faster, safer and more competitively priced transport of minerals and agricultural and industrial products produced in the Republic of Zambia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola across the Atlantic Ocean to the rest of the world. That is a catalysing project that will change the economic landscape in Angola and southern Africa, allowing for the emergence of a number of ventures along the Lobito Corridor, with a direct impact on the economies of the southern subregion of Africa and others on our continent.
The Republic of Angola is a hospitable country, open to the world and always ready to act as a proactive partner to help to increase global cooperation in favour of development and the implementation of joint and complementary actions that help to meet the permanent challenges in the fight against international terrorism and other threats to peace, world security and sustainable development. With the improvement in the business environment in recent years, we are open to tourism and direct private investment in practically all sectors of our economy that are of interest to investors. The international community is welcome in Angola.
