As we meet today, we confront yet another year of complex crises and conflicts, as a deeply divided world watches. Our prospects for a more peaceful, just and equitable world are blurred today. Our times are challenging.
A few days ago, we committed to the Pact of the Future (resolution 79/1), a sound framework with a high level of ambition and actionable deliverables. We have made other, similar major commitments in the past. We have not always kept them, to put it very mildly. We have paid the price. This is yet another chance — one we take under pressure — to make a difference for a more peaceful and prosperous future even as the times we live in could not be grimmer.
Albania humbly joins this discussion after the conclusion of its mission, for the first time, as a member of the Security Council. Albania sought to represent the community of countries that stand together for values and principles that are non-negotiable, and we sincerely hope that we have met the expectations of many. Today more than ever, we need tolerance, trust and a hand of friendship extended to each other. Make no mistake — by “tolerance”, I do not mean complacency. Tolerance demands that we go beyond our comfort zones and not merely tolerate but tolerate respectfully, actively and graciously by not simply accepting other views but constantly engaging with the complexity of all our own histories.
Tolerance for us Albanians is not merely the passive acknowledgement and grudging acceptance of someone’s diversity. Our form of tolerance — the tolerance that Muslim and Christian Albanians expressed during the Second World War towards the Jews by putting their lives on the line against evil and making Albania the only country in Europe to end the war with more Jews than it had when the war began — requires its own partisan spirit. It requires engaging with those who are different from us, accommodating disagreements with respect and continuing to build bridges so that we can continue to debate and foster further understanding and peace by putting ourselves in the other’s shoes. But it also requires that we continue to challenge ourselves by reflecting on the possibility of our own biases and prejudices, by reflecting on the arbitrariness and unilaterality that we attribute to others, and by constantly interrogating our own double moral standards.
It is with that trust in humanity and humanism that Albania became a safe haven for people who escaped death after the fall of Kabul to the Taliban, who were welcomed and accepted by my country while bigger and richer States members of the European Union (EU) and NATO turned their backs on them. In the same spirit, we gave shelter to several thousand Iranian refugees whose lives were in daily danger in Camp Liberty, in Iraq, where they were raided and killed by Tehran’s assassins. We paid a dear price for being their hosts. The Tehran totalitarian regime engaged in a large-scale cyberattack on Albania that was aimed at bringing the country to its knees by wiping out all the digital infrastructure of our public services. They were very brutal, but they failed miserably. We did not waver and we will not waver in our commitment to sheltering those people in our country for as long as it takes. Our hospitality was and is related in no way to any political stance against Iran, but only to a humanitarian belief engraved in our spirit as a nation.
We recently extended a hand of help to our neighbour and special friend, Italy, in an effort to ease the difficulties that geography has burdened it with in one of the most pressuring phenomena of our times — immigration. Meanwhile, instead of just talking, we tried to act, without claiming that we could solve the huge immigration problem in Europe but, on the other hand, without just sitting around and by trying instead to build and add something constructive. We just played our part. That attitude of solidarity, cooperation and good-neighbourly relations is the linchpin of our policy in our region, the Western Balkans.
In our region, after more than a quarter of a century, the deep wounds left by the violent disintegration of the former Yugoslavia still need to be healed, but we have also seen the construction of peace, reflected above all in the vision, unparalleled wisdom and courage that led to the creation of the European Union. All of us in the Western Balkans have tried for over a decade to come together and meet to talk about our challenges and plan our futures. It is Albania’s firm belief that we need to look at the past with the eyes of the future and not look at the future with the eyes of the past.
Today the peoples of the Balkans have a moment of historical opportunity in a context of historical danger in the wider Europe, where the Russian aggression against Ukraine should serve us all as a permanently ringing bell. I would say that the Western Balkans is in a much better position today than ever before, but we must work tirelessly and patiently among ourselves in the region and, above all, with our partners to ensure that a return to the past is not just impossible, but simply unimaginable.
In that context, our brotherly Republic of Kosovo is an irreversible reality as a State among the six countries of the Western Balkans, with a clear European perspective and an undisputed allegiance to the large democratic community of nations. Any artificially drawn parallels between Kosovo and the occupied areas of Ukraine are meant to distract and confuse whomever they can under this roof and international public opinion, but they will never manage to dilute the truth that Kosovo is now an intrinsic part of the international reality and an aspiring member of the Euro-Atlantic community, and must not be held hostage by anyone with false pretensions and excuses, starting with the group of five EU members that still do not recognize Kosovo’s rightful place in every international forum and organization.
In the third year of the unprovoked and unjustified war of aggression of Russia against Ukraine, we feel compelled to renew our call for Russia to stop the war. It is a war that neither Ukraine nor our community of like-minded nations chose, a catastrophe conceived by the decision of one country and, indeed, one delusional dreamer of an old, imperial past. Rewarding an aggressor that annexes the territories of a sovereign country by disarming the victim of aggression does not bring peace but paves the way for more war.
All those who seek peace by trying to stop Ukraine instead of stopping neo-imperialist Russia’s aggression are wrong and they should be aware of a very simple truth — a peace that defeats Ukraine would bring only further aggression and turn our world into one ruled by might, not by right. Yes, we seek peace too, and we want peace to be made between Ukraine and Russia as soon as possible. Of course, we would support any peace attempt and format that would include Russia around the table, but we seek a just peace based on the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the resolutions of the General Assembly — a peace that cannot undermine Ukraine and its rights.
Earlier this year in Tirana, our capital, we hosted the second summit between Ukraine and South-East Europe and welcomed President Zelenskyy, a true and brave leader of a resistance that is not simply a resistance to brutal aggression against its homeland, but a resistance for the very existence of democracy and a just, rules-based Europe and world. Albania will continue to stand by Ukraine and support it for as long as necessary and until a lasting, just peace is achieved.
There is another war waging in Europe’s South-East. Albania stands firm in its position that there is no place for Hamas and its like in the world we want to live in, just as we fully recognize the right of the Palestinian people to have their own safe place in this world and to give birth and raise their children in their own State. Guaranteeing such a basic condition for millions of Palestinians is much easier said than done, just as it is much easier said than done for the Jewish people to live in their land without anyone questioning their right to exist. We need to restore our moral compass in the Middle East, yes, but there is no moral compass that can relativize and, God forbid, normalize terror and a terrorist organization like Hamas as a part of the peace we all want between Israel and Palestine. Doing so would be like relativizing the scourge of anti-Semitism and agreeing to coexist with a new vicious form of Nazism, which is the worst thing that could have happened for so many years to, first and foremost, the Palestinian people themselves.
Nevertheless, it is not too difficult to state loudly and strongly that so much violence and destruction cannot be the long-term solution for either Israel or Palestine and should stop. We reaffirm here our national support for a just and comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution. Albania supports the international community’s efforts related to the conflict, through dialogue and negotiations leading to a true solution of two independent States living in peace and good-neighbourliness, a functional State of Palestine and a secure State of Israel, which, instead of being lectured to from afar, should be supported — with no “yes, buts” — in its fight against terror, while still more than 100 innocent people are being held hostage in hellish holes under the face of the Earth by the butchers of 7 October last year.
The rule of law stands at the heart of one of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, a goal that plays the role of enabler and accelerator of all the other Sustainable Development Goals. Its importance stands on the promise of achieving more inclusive, just and peaceful societies. Without strong institutions, access to justice and respect for human rights, progress on the other goals — such as ending poverty, ensuring food security and promoting health and well-being, including by fighting climate change — will be limited.
Albania is living proof of the radical transformation of good governance practices and mindset. Our public services are now over 95 per cent paperless and the digitalization of access and services has curbed corruption, informality and mistrust in institutions. With its unprecedented justice reform, Albania has invested tremendously over the past few years in achieving SDG 16 as a crucial tool for securing a sustainable future, social progress, economic prosperity, environmental sustainability and justice.
But the struggle of a developing country for just and fair institutions and good governance is not one that can be won within a year, through a few reforms or even during a single decade. On the contrary, it is a perpetual effort to transform domestically at the highest levels of policymaking by adopting the most effective practices of providing access to citizens at all levels and instances of Government. We are committed to playing our part and collaborating with the international community to ensure the successful realization of our Albania 2030 Agenda.
Building upon the ongoing work during our previous mandate as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, we will continue to work with like-minded countries to improve the governance and institutional efficiency of the United Nations, as well as multilateralism and respect for human rights. As a member of the Human Rights Council, Albania is committed to the universal principles of human rights and dignity in a world where every human being can realize her or his full potential and live with dignity and respect.
A very dear daughter of the Albanians, Saint Mother Teresa, once said, “I alone cannot change the world, but I can cast a stone across the waters to create many ripples”. No better saying can mirror today’s need to work together on what is clearly the substance of multilateralism.
