I would like to begin by congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. We thank him for the theme he has chosen, “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”. We could not agree more with that goal, which we fully support, because our country, the Principality of Andorra, is evidence of the ability of people to survive over almost 800 years of history in a peaceful manner, thanks to respect and understanding within a territory that has never known war or had armies. Even in the most turbulent times of the old continent, Andorra was an oasis of peace, tolerance and coexistence.
I would also like to especially thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his perseverance in always putting conciliation first and being a strong voice in favour of respect for international law and the fight against climate change. In particular, I would like to make special mention of his drive for the Summit of the Future, which gave rise to the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which my country has signed with the aim of strengthening the multilateral system and adopting concrete measures that will allow us to face new challenges and to forge a road map to address the existential threats to humankind, civilization and the habitability of the planet.
The classics that form the basis of Western culture tell us — and I use the present tense because the classics never die — that every word is vain and empty unless it is accompanied by deeds. What matters above all is the work and action that people undertake throughout their lives. All civilizations are the offspring of the specific circumstances that have surrounded them and very often go down in history for their achievements. But what is the achievement, what is the vocation and what is the legacy that our civilization will leave? Or rather, what are the achievements, vocation and legacy that we want our civilization to leave?
Today in the West, we often forget that democracy is much more than merely casting a ballot every four or five years, because what sustains the concept of democracy are the values that emerge from it, among them dignity, tolerance, equality, freedom and respect, both for individuals and for nations. Those values are the human rights that the General Assembly was responsible for protecting 76 years ago with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. But it seems that the spirit with which the Declaration was forged as a symbol of peace and dignity after two devastating world wars is gradually fading away.
The forward march of extreme political positions is explained as a reaction to an order that is perceived as threatened. The feeling of having lost a not-so-distant past that was much better than the present pervades current generations and is reactivated by the perception that climate change will cause a deterioration of living conditions, that globalization and migratory movements dilute and depersonalize us as a society, or that children, adolescents and young people today will live less well than their parents.
We are therefore at a turning point where it is necessary to really address that debate and provide concrete and effective responses to counter and prevent the situation. On the threshold of its eightieth anniversary, the United Nations must continue to be the world’s most important Organization, from which all the States that comprise it and give it meaning move in the same direction, which is none other than to give an effective response to the great challenges of our time to leave a hopeful legacy for future generations.
We have never had so many tools at our disposal to achieve cooperation and dialogue. Therefore, in the face of a truly complex scenario, yet based on our conviction in the equality of nations, we must make the Charter of the United Nations prevail and strengthen its pillars through the defence of human rights and international humanitarian law as a normative set of relations between States.
The gravity of the conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza, Lebanon, the Sudan and elsewhere, which, unfortunately, have become permanent, such as in the Sahel region, cannot leave us indifferent. We need urgently to mobilize to achieve one of the noblest objectives of politics — peace. We must unite and find solutions to conflicts without resort to violence and military resources. To that end, we call on all parties to work for peace, to respect and abide by the rules of international humanitarian law, because nothing justifies the attacks that civilian population are enduring; because nothing justifies attacks on hospitals and schools; and because nothing justifies the use of hunger as a strategy of war. Nothing justifies such irrationality — an irrationality of which children are the main victims.
Childhood and young people occupy a very prominent place in Andorra’s international agenda because we firmly believe that they are the present and the future and that any action in their favour is therefore strategic to the development of any country. We have therefore been giving our full support from the outset to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and, more recently, to the study on the impact of climate change on children and armed conflict.
When I asked early in my speech about the achievements, vocation and legacy that we want to leave behind, there should be no doubt that it is a world in peace for children and young people. The great responsibility that we must assume is to ensure that future generations do not live worse and that they participate fully in progress, as was recently made clear at the Summit of the Future.
In 1993, Andorra became a Member of the United Nations. We found ourselves in a very hopeful international context, with Europe reunited after the Cold War. When we took the step join the Organization, we did so in the conviction that we were a society open to the world and that shared global challenges and opportunities with the international community. We believe that the world’s problems are also our problems and that is why we wanted and want to be part of the solutions to those problems.
More than three decades have passed and, despite the ghosts of the Cold War having returned; despite the fact that the Middle East conflict has reached an unprecedented level of tension; despite the fact that the advance of extremism is worrisome, our country firmly believes in the concert of nations, in international commitment and in multilateralism as the best instruments, the only instruments, to resolve the current crisis.
But Andorra also attaches particular importance to regional cooperation, particularly with the European Union, with which it has negotiated an association agreement that should allow us progressive and structured access to the European internal market and facilitate the diversification of our economy, as well as to participate in the construction of a geographic, economic and political reality — that of the European Union — from the privileged status of associate member.
When Andorra assumes an obligation, whether by becoming a member of an international organization or by committing itself through an international treaty, it is very aware of its implications. Our size, however small it may seem in the eyes of the large States, does not distance us from ambitious and increasingly crucial objectives, such as multilateralism, the climate emergency, gender equality, the digital transition or cultural diversity. In that last area, Andorra is proud to have co-facilitated, together with Guatemala, resolution 78/330, on multilingualism in the United Nations, for another year.
It is true that climate change is a global threat, but it is also very true that some territories are affected by it more than others. Those are those regions where the sea level is rising and mountainous territories whose ecosystem has become more vulnerable. That is the case for Andorra. Climate change can change our living habits and even the economy of our country. We have therefore made the fight against climate change one of our greatest objectives, both internationally and nationally. Since the ratification in 2011 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Andorra has met its communication obligations under the principles of transparency, coherence, comparability, exhaustiveness and precision, and it has done so in anticipation of the requirements of the Convention.
In 2015, Andorra was one of the pioneering parties to the Framework Convention to communicate its nationally determined contribution and to update it in 2020 and 2022 in order to increase the medium-term objectives and achieve climate neutrality by 2050. In 2023, it was the first country in the world to present the biennial transparency report, thus demonstrating once again the importance we attach to our commitment to the fight against climate change. At the national level, we have also made great efforts to implement a new energy policy in order to progressively increase the national production of renewable energy and replace heat production sources with less polluting systems. The commitment to renewable energies has been led by the public sector, with a very ambitious legislative deployment and important aid and action plans.
But we know that none of those efforts will be of any use if the rest of the countries do not join us and if we do not all row in the same direction, because the fight against climate change is the most urgent and far-reaching global challenge and one that requires the greatest levels of cooperation, collaboration, generosity and respect.
We are at the midway point and practically in the final stretch of the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our achievements at this point are disappointing, considering that behind those results there are millions of people suffering the consequences. The Sustainable Development Goals are ambitious, but if we pursue them with persistence, creativity and innovation we can achieve authentic changes with inclusion as a principle, making gender equality a reality, sustainability a norm, child protection an inviolable principle and the gaps closed forever.
The French poet and novelist Louis Aragon wrote that, “The future of man is woman”. He did so in 1963, just before the arrival of full legal equality between men and women, in a heartfelt declaration of love and admiration for his wife, his muse. In certain parts of the world, we still have a long way to go towards understanding that when women have the same opportunities as men to grow, learn, express themselves, work and earn money, we all benefit. In Andorra, equality, non-discrimination and inclusion are cross-cutting elements of public policy and we have adopted legislative measures to establish the commitments that allow us to fully achieve those objectives. That is a logical consequence in a society in which women have been participants and a very active part of public affairs.
Beyond public policies, however, the key element for social transformation is education. Equality in education means not only teaching our sons and daughters to respect each other; it means providing them with the necessary tools to question the social norms that perpetuate inequality and to build a society where every person can develop their full potential, regardless of her or his gender. Currently, our institutions exercise gender parity in decision-making positions and, for the first time, we have the honour of having an Andorran expert on the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
But gender equality is a path that requires determined and persevering action on the part of us all and, as representatives of our respective countries, we have the moral and political obligation to promote that transformation. Our commitment must be to transform gender equality from a long-term aspiration into a concrete reality in our societies. Only in that way will we guarantee a better future for future generations.
Access to information is redefining the paradigms of growth and economic and social development. As public services and the private sector move into the digital world, the gap between those who can access it and those who cannot will become ever larger and more pernicious. The Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I) that we adopted at the Summit of the Future includes actions to promote digital literacy and ensure an inclusive, open, safe and secure digital future. Multilateralism has a crucial role to play in that area by facilitating opportunities while ensuring accessibility and security in the new virtual space of globalization.
For small States such as ours, the potential of those technologies can provide resources with exponential added value. Aware of that scenario and with a manifest need to diversify our economy, we have made great progress in that area. Currently, 96 per cent of Andorran households have an Internet connection and we have implemented a National Digital Transformation Strategy that places special emphasis on guaranteeing the digital rights of citizens and on complying with Sustainable Development Goals 9, 16 and 17. That includes the creation of an ethical and legal framework to safeguard digital rights, protect privacy and data security, and offer free access to information in the digital sphere, because we want everyone to have knowledge and access to the digital dimension and thus avoid situations of inequality.
The Principality of Andorra committed itself to the Organization of the people and for the people more than 30 years ago in the hope that a better world is possible and in the conviction that my country, the Principality of Andorra, despite its small size, can also do great and exemplary things. We present ourselves to the world as a country with a long history that had finally found its place in the international community — a country that is open to the world, with a constructive spirit and a peaceful and dialoguing disposition in favour of understanding and harmony among peoples. Those values continue to guide us at the national and international levels. All peoples must promote a new culture of peace based on the abolition of war and the commitment to reaching peaceful agreements that resolve conflicts. Development must reach all corners of the planet, fundamental rights must be respected and the new digital universe must be in the hands of knowledge.
I began my statement by quoting the classics, and let me end in the same way. There is a foundational work of ancient Greek literature that has permeated Western culture since ancient times and is very difficult to forget. It speaks of conquest, destruction, greed, hatred and compassion, and of love and death. Homer’s Iliad is in a certain way a mirror of the human condition, and although it shows that life is not always fair and obeys the arbitrariness of the gods, it also shows that, deep down, human relations can be, if we so wish, profoundly humane in the best sense of the word. And that, I believe, is the message that we must make our own here and now. We must maintain faith in humanity and aspire to build, together, a world in peace and more just, supportive and inclusive.
