At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Dennis Francis for his outstanding leadership of the previous session.
I also congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, and I wish him success in that endeavour.
From the rostrum of the General Assembly, a place that has always embraced our ambitions and agonies, we call upon all to join hands and work together to create a better world for our sons and daughters and for future generations — a better world in which they can enjoy a decent, prosperous and stable life; a world in which all political, diplomatic and economic capabilities and tools and the latest technological and scientific advancements are harnessed to preserve life in all its forms.
In the United Arab Emirates, we have focused on that vision. We have unleashed the wheel of progress in every field, from development, economy and education to technology and industry. Since its inception, the United Arab Emirates has adopted a transparent foreign policy based on credibility and building balanced relations with all countries. That includes supporting regional and international efforts to achieve stability and reduce escalations, encouraging dialogue and building bridges, as well as resolving crises instead of merely managing them.
As our world stands at a dangerous crossroads, we must redirect the compass of our international action to focus on a set of fundamental and non-negotiable principles. Most importantly, we must stand united in the face of contentious issues, support all peoples without applying double standards, ensure the protection of civilians, uphold the rule of law, commit to human rights and respect the principles of good neighbourliness.
Returning to those basic principles has become more urgent than ever, particularly in the light of serious violations committed in conflicts raging in our region and around the world. Those violations have deepened human suffering, erased decades of progress and caused widespread displacement, creating massive refugee crises. They have also increased the burdens on concerned and neighbouring countries, particularly with the ongoing bloody war on the Gaza Strip, the wars in the Sudan and Ukraine, and the crises taking place in Yemen, Syria, Libya, the Sahel, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Haiti and other countries. It must be recalled here that even wars have rules. Parties must respect international law, including international humanitarian law.
In Gaza, an immediate and lasting ceasefire must be reached, the rapid, full and unimpeded access of humanitarian aid at scale must be allowed, and the hostages and detainees must be released. The relevant Security Council resolutions must also be implemented. We must act wisely in response to the rapid developments threatening our region. It is evident that everything we have warned of is now unfolding beyond our control. We regret to see the war spread to Lebanon at a time when we were hoping for an announcement about a deal to end the war on Gaza.
It is unacceptable to ignore the decisions and advisory opinions issued by the highest judicial body of the United Nations, the International Court of Justice. That includes the provisional measures issued by the Court regarding the war on Gaza. In that context, we call for maintaining the security and safety of people. We must safeguard regional and international stability, including the security of international navigation, trade routes and energy supplies. That is especially crucial in the light of the continued attempts of terrorist and extremist groups to exploit people’s suffering for their own political goals.
In the Sudan, the warring parties must stop the fighting immediately and permanently and allow unhindered and sustainable access to humanitarian assistance across borders and conflict lines. We express our complete rejection of the continued targeting by the warring parties of civilians and their obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian aid. My country condemns in the strongest terms the blatant attack launched by the Sudanese Armed Forces on the residence of the Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates in Khartoum on 29 September, in flagrant violation of the fundamental principle of the inviolability of diplomatic premises and of international conventions and norms, particularly the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
We call on the warring parties to engage seriously in peace talks. In that regard, we emphasize the importance of building on the positive outcomes achieved in the meetings of the working group of the Aligned for Advancing Lifesaving and Peace in Sudan Group. We commend all initiatives aimed at finding a comprehensive solution to the crisis. We must all continue working with regional and international partners to alleviate the suffering of the Sudanese people so as to ensure them a safer and more prosperous life.
In Ukraine, the impacts of the ongoing war have transcended seas and continents. It is therefore imperative to find a peaceful solution to end the conflict, which has increased global polarization, created refugee and prisoner-related crises and impacted global food security. Through our continued engagement with all parties, my country has contributed to the release of nearly 2,000 prisoners of war through mediation efforts between the Russian Federation and Ukraine. We continue to push for dialogue and de-escalation and support recovery and reconstruction.
Speaking of resolving long-standing crises, we must reiterate here our full support for Moroccan sovereignty over the Moroccan Sahara region, as well as for the autonomy initiative to maintain the territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Morocco.
In numerous crises, my country has refused to the international response to be obstructed by growing global polarization or obstacles imposed by conflict parties. To that end, my country has sought to overcome those challenges and used all available means to enable humanitarian work to continue. To help all those in need around the world, in line with our commitment to the legacy of Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, the founder of the United Arab Emirates. Today, Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the United Arab Emirates, has directed $100 million in urgent relief aid to support the brotherly people of Lebanon in facing the current challenges.
When the war intensified in the Sudan, pushing millions of people into a multidimensional humanitarian disaster, the United Arab Emirates devoted its efforts to supporting the Sudanese people. We recently contributed $100 million to support United Nations efforts to address the humanitarian repercussions of the war in the Sudan and neighbouring countries. We have also established two field hospitals in Chad to provide medical services to all those in need, including Sudanese refugees.
Similarly, we spare no effort in supporting the innocent people besieged in Gaza. To that end, we have sent urgent aid by land, air and sea and provided treatment to sick and injured Palestinians through the field hospital we established in Rafah and the floating hospital in El-Arish. The United Arab Emirates also continues to help evacuate the wounded and sick and their families from Gaza, most of whom are children and cancer patients, to receive the necessary treatment in the United Arab Emirates hospitals. We have also maintained our support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which plays a vital role in Gaza. We welcome its recent launch of preparatory programmes to resume its educational services in the Strip. We applaud the humanitarian workers who provide a ray of hope in the dark shadow of war for all their efforts.
If we want to bring an end to the vicious seven-decade cycle of the Palestinian issue, we must take concrete steps towards the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the two-State solution. We must also consider the establishment of a temporary international mission in the Gaza Strip, upon an official request from the Palestinian Government, to address the humanitarian crisis, re-establish security and law and reunite Gaza and the West Bank under a reformed Palestinian Authority. That would enable the Palestinian Authority, once reformed, to take firm steps towards reaching a comprehensive and just political solution for the Palestinian issue.
My country believes that the State of Palestine, which only a couple of weeks ago took its new seat in the Hall like any other nation, has fulfilled the requirements for full membership of the Organization. It deserves to be recognized by all States as a full-fledged State under occupation.
In parallel with our efforts on those issues, my country renews its demand on Iran to end its occupation of the three United Arab Emirates islands of Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa. Those islands are an integral part of the United Arab Emirates. We will continue to urge Iran to respond to our repeated calls to resolve that issue, either through direct negotiations or by resort to the International Court of Justice.
With respect to all other issues, the United Arab Emirates believes that the best way to resolve crises is through diplomacy. We cannot fight fire with fire. When traditional approaches are no longer effective, it is our duty to update them so as to move forward during the darkest moments of our history.
Building a secure and prosperous future requires renovating the mechanisms of multilateral action to better address the serious challenges surrounding us and to play important roles in finding solutions to conflicts and crises, particularly as the current international system has failed in preventing the most serious crimes or holding its perpetrators accountable. That will first require reform of the Security Council through a comprehensive effort that includes all States Members of the United Nations, which would allow the Council to restore its credibility, fulfil its mandate of maintaining international peace and security, and combat impunity, even in situations where polarization and political considerations prevent it from taking action.
Developing and poor countries must also be at the centre of any international effort. We must ensure that women and young people are empowered to play their critical and meaningful roles in all aspects of collective action. While we are preoccupied with addressing the current reality, we must not lose sight of the importance of crisis prevention efforts. The deadliest wars in history did not break out overnight; they were the result of extremism, hate speech and intolerance accumulating over years, if not decades. That requires us to take concrete steps to uphold the principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence and to coordinate regional and international efforts to extinguish the sparks of conflict before they ignite. Furthermore, collective action is the only way to address the challenges posing threats to the future of humankind and our planet, including climate change.
The outcomes of the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28), hosted by the United Arab Emirates, demonstrated what we can achieve when we work together. The historic United Arab Emirates consensus adopted by 198 countries embodies a global consensus on developing measures to prevent global warming above 1.5°C and to operationalize the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage to compensate the countries most affected by climate change. We will continue to cooperate with everyone to support climate action and clean and renewable energy solutions, including through the COP Presidencies Troika initiative with Azerbaijan and Brazil, to provide a concrete response that contributes to the achievement of the objectives of international climate agreements.
We will also pursue our efforts to address the issues of water scarcity and the provision of sustainable clean water for all, including through the United Nations Water Conference, which we intend to host in the United Arab Emirates in 2026, in partnership with Senegal. Our other initiative in that field, most notably, is the Mohamed bin Zayed Water Initiative, which was launched this year.
In that forward-looking spirit, my country seeks to explore the potential opportunities provided by advanced technologies and to harness emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence, as essential tools to find innovative solutions for our businesses, lives and Government services. We believe that international attention and investments should be directed towards those technologies in order to accelerate sustainable development and achieve transformative shifts in addressing the challenges we face in different fields. That will allow us to bridge development gaps and support progress for all.
Let us seize this opportunity to correct the course of joint international action, our refuge in difficult times, and work together hand-in-hand to create a bright future that future generations will be proud of.
