Good afternoon to the authorities of the United Nations, to the representatives of its Member States and to all the citizens of the world who are watching us.
For those who do not know, I am not a politician, but a liberal libertarian economist who never harboured any ambition to engage in politics and upon whom was conferred the honour of holding the office of President of the Argentine Republic, amid the tumultuous failure of more than one century of collectivist policies that ravaged our country.
This is my first address to the General Assembly, and I humbly seize this opportunity to sound a warning to the nations of the world about the path that they have taken for decades and the perils should the Organization fail to discharge its original remit.
I did not come here to tell the world what to do; I came to tell the world what will happen if the United Nations continues to promote the collectivist policies that it has been promoting under the mandate of the Agenda for Sustainable Development and to set out the values that the new Argentina is upholding.
I wish to begin by giving credit where credit is due. The United Nations was born out of the horror of the bloodiest war in history of the world, with the main purpose of ensuring that it would never happen again. To that end, the Organization cast its fundamental principles in stone, in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which enshrines a fundamental consensus in the maxim that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. Under the stewardship of the Organization and through the adoption of those ideas, over the past 70 years, humankind experienced the longest period of global peace in history, which also coincided with the period of greatest economic growth in history. An international forum was created where nations could settle their disputes through cooperation instead of immediately resorting to weapons, and something inconceivable was achieved: permanently seating the five foremost global Powers around the same table, each vested with an equal power of veto, despite their diametrically opposed interests.
None of that eliminated the scourge of war, but it did ensure that no conflict has — as yet — escalated to a global level. The result was that we went from having two world wars in less than 40 years, which together claimed more than 120 million lives, to enjoying 70 consecutive years of relative global peace and stability, under an order that allowed the entire world to integrate commercially, to compete and to prosper because, as Bastiat put it, where trade enters, bullets do not — because trade guarantees peace, freedom guarantees trade, and equality before the law guarantees liberty. In sum, the words of the Prophet Isaiah that can be read in the park across the street came to pass:
“And He shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people. They shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war anymore.”
(The Holy Bible, Isaiah 2:4)
That is, on the whole, what came to pass under the watch of the United Nations, in its early decades. From that standpoint we are, therefore, talking about a remarkable success in the history of nations and one that cannot be ignored.
At some point, however — as invariably happens with most bureaucratic entities that we humans create — the United Nations ceased upholding the principles set out in its founding declaration and began to alter. An organization that had been conceived, in essence, to serve as a shield to safeguard the kingdom of humankind morphed into a multi-tentacled Leviathan, which seeks to determine not only what each nation State should do, but also how all the world’s citizens should live. We thus went from an organization that pursued peace to one that imposes an ideological agenda on its members in relation to countless issues affecting the life of humans in society. The successful United Nations model, whose origins can be traced back to the ideas of President Wilson and his talk of a society of “peace without victory” and which was founded on the cooperation among nation States, has been jettisoned and replaced by a model of a supranational government of international bureaucrats who seek to impose a specific way of life on the world’s citizens.
What is under discussion this week, here in New York, at the Summit of the Future, is nothing other than the entrenchment of the tragic course that the institution has taken — the entrenchment of a model that, in the words of the Secretary-General himself, requires a new social contract to be defined on a global scale, with a redoubling of the commitments contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I want to set out clearly Argentina’s position on the 2030 Agenda: as well-intentioned as its goals may be, the 2030 Agenda represents nothing more than a socialist supranational government programme that seeks to cure the problems of modernity with solutions that undermine the sovereignty of nation States and violate people’s right to life, liberty and property. It is an agenda that seeks to solve poverty, inequality and discrimination with legislation that only entrenches them. World history shows that the only way to guarantee prosperity is by limiting the power of the monarch, guaranteeing equality before the law and defending the right of individuals to life, liberty and property.
It has been precisely the adoption of that agenda, arising from privileged interests and the abandonment of the principles outlined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that distorted the role of this institution and put it on the wrong path. Thus, we have seen how an organization born to defend the rights of man has been one of the main proponents of the systematic violation of freedom, as — for example — with the global quarantines during the year 2020, which should be considered a crime against humanity.
The same house that claims to defend human rights, allowed bloody dictatorships, such as that of Cuba and Venezuela, to join the Human Rights Council without the slightest reproach. The same house that claims to defend women’s rights, allows countries that punish their women for showing their skin to join the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. This same house has systematically voted against the State of Israel, the only country in the Middle East that defends liberal democracy, while simultaneously demonstrating a total inability to respond to the scourge of terrorism.
In the economic sphere, collectivist policies have been promoted that threaten economic growth, violate property rights and hinder the natural economic process, preventing the most underprivileged countries in the world from freely enjoying their own resources in order to move forward, with regulations and prohibitions promoted precisely by the countries that became developed through the same activities they condemn today. Moreover, a toxic relationship has been promoted between global governance policies and international lending agencies, requiring the most neglected countries to commit resources they do not have to programmes they do not need, turning them into perpetual debtors to promote the agenda of the global elites.
Nor has the tutelage of the World Economic Forum helped, where ridiculous policies are promoted with Malthusian blinders, such as zero-emission policies, which harm poor countries in particular, and policies linked to sexual and reproductive rights, when the birth rate in Western countries is plummeting, heralding a bleak future for all. Nor has the Organization satisfactorily fulfilled its mission of defending the territorial sovereignty of its members, as we Argentines know first-hand, in regard to the Malvinas Islands. And we have even reached a situation in which the Security Council, the most important organ of this house, has become distorted because the veto of its permanent members has begun to be used in defence of the particular interests of some.
As a result, our Organization today is powerless to provide solutions to real global conflicts, such as the aberrant Russian invasion of Ukraine, which has already cost the lives of more than 300,000 people, leaving a trail of more than 1 million wounded in the process. Instead of confronting those conflicts, this Organization invests time and effort in imposing on poor countries what and how they should produce, with whom they should associate, what they should eat and what they should believe in, as the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) seeks to dictate. This long list of errors and contradictions has not been gratuitous but has resulted in the loss of credibility of the United Nations in the eyes of the citizens of the free world and in the distortion of its functions.
Therefore, I would like to issue a warning — we are at the end of a cycle. The collectivism and moral posturing of the woke agenda have collided with reality and no longer have credible solutions to offer to the world’s real problems. In fact, they never did. If the 2030 Agenda failed — as its own promoters acknowledge — the response should be to ask ourselves if it was not, from the start, an ill-conceived programme, to accept that reality and to change course. We cannot seek to perpetuate that mistake by doubling down on an agenda that has failed. The same thing always happens with ideas from the left, which designs a model according to what human beings should be — according to them — and when individuals freely act otherwise, they have no better solution than to restrict, repress and restrict their freedom.
We in Argentina have already seen with our own eyes what lies at the end of this road of envy and sad passions — poverty, brutalization, anarchy and a fatal absence of freedom. We still have time to turn away from that course.
I want to be clear about something so that there are no misinterpretations. Argentina, which is undergoing a profound process of change, has decided to embrace the ideas of freedom; those ideas that maintain that all citizens are born free and equal before the law, that we have inalienable rights granted by the Creator, among which are the right to life, liberty and property. Those principles, which guide the process of change that we are carrying out in Argentina, are also the principles that will guide our international conduct from now on.
We believe in the defence of life for all; we believe in the defence of property for all; we believe in freedom of speech for all; we believe in freedom of worship for all; we believe in freedom of commerce for all; and we believe in limited Governments, all of them.
And because in these times what happens in one country quickly impacts others, we believe that all peoples should live free from tyranny and oppression, whether it takes the form of political oppression, economic slavery or religious fanaticism. That fundamental idea must not remain mere words; it must be supported in deeds — diplomatically, economically and materially — through the combined strength of all countries that stand for freedom.
This doctrine of the new Argentina is no more and no less than the true essence of the United Nations Organization, that is, the cooperation of the nations united in defence of freedom. If the United Nations decides to retake the principles that gave it life and to adapt again the role for which it was conceived, it can count on the unwavering support of Argentina in the struggle for freedom.
States should also know that Argentina will not support any policy that implies the restriction of individual freedoms, of trade, or the violation of the natural rights of individuals, no matter who promotes it or how much consensus that institution enjoys. For that reason, we wish to officially express our dissent with regard to the Pact for the Future, signed on Sunday, and we invite all the nations of the free world to join us, not only in rejecting that Pact, but also in the creation of a new agenda for this noble institution: an agenda of freedom.
From this day on, know that the Argentine Republic will abandon the position of historical neutrality that characterized us and will be at the forefront of the struggle in defence of freedom because, as Thomas Paine said, “those who expect to reap the blessings of freedom, must, like men, undergo the fatigue of supporting it”.
May God bless the Argentinian people and all the citizens of the world, and may the forces of heaven be with us.
Long live freedom, damn it!
