This is my fourth speech at the United Nations General Assembly, and this speech will be significantly different from the previous ones. The key messages of my previous speeches were about the deadlock in achieving peace between Armenia and Azerbaijan, but today I want to say that peace between Armenia and Azerbaijan is not only possible but also within reach. Why do I think so? I think so for a few specific reasons.
Quite recently, on 30 August, Armenia and Azerbaijan signed the regulation on the joint activity of the commissions on the delimitation of State borders between the two countries, which is the first bilateral legal document signed between the parties. But more importantly, through that document, Armenia and Azerbaijan agreed to set the 1991 Alma-Ata Declaration as the basic principle for border delimitation between the two countries and to be guided by it. That means that Armenia and Azerbaijan de jure reaffirm the principle of recognizing each other’s territorial integrity and the inviolability of the borders that existed during the time of the Soviet Union, which are fundamental factors for establishing peace. Now that the two countries have de jure reaffirmed that they have no territorial claims over each other, what we have to do now is to take the next step and sign the agreement on the establishment of peace and inter-State relations between the Republic of Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan. The President of Azerbaijan and I have stated many times that at least 80 per cent of that agreement has been agreed upon.
To seize this historic opportunity and to avoid the risk of a deadlock, Armenia now proposes to take what has already been agreed in the draft agreement and to sign it so as to have a peace agreement between Armenia and Azerbaijan and then proceed with negotiations on pending issues. We are ready to do that right now. Why are we proposing to do so? Because there is no precedent of a peace agreement or any agreement that regulates and solves everything. It is practically impossible. After signing any agreement, two countries may always need to conclude new agreements and make new arrangements for that very reason. No matter how comprehensive an agreement might be, many important issues need to be further addressed. In the case of Armenia and Azerbaijan, the agreed articles of the draft peace agreement actually contain, among other important provisions, provisions on peace, on not having territorial claims over each other and on not putting forward such claims in the future, on establishing diplomatic relations and a joint commission to oversee the implementation of the peace agreement, on not interfering in each other’s internal affairs and on not using force and the threat of force.
Signing the peace agreement with the agreed articles would significantly facilitate the resolution of the non-agreed issues. The agreed parts of the draft peace agreement provide tools for that, one of which concerns the diplomatic relations to be established between Armenia and Azerbaijan, and the other the joint Armenia-Azerbaijan commission to oversee the implementation of the peace agreement. The existence of de jure peace between Armenia and Azerbaijan through the signing of the proposed agreement and the establishment of diplomatic relations would change the overall atmosphere and the perceptions held by our Governments and peoples, which would significantly facilitate the resolution of the remaining issues.
Azerbaijan, however, insists that the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia is an obstacle to the peace agreement, because it allegedly contains territorial claims concerning Azerbaijan. Without going into details, allow me to say that there is nothing of the kind in our Constitution. There are no territorial claims over Azerbaijan, and we can provide detailed written proof regarding that to all international partners concerned. Moreover, it is the Constitution of Azerbaijan that contains territorial claims over the Republic of Armenia, and we can also present written argumentation on that to all international partners concerned.
Please note, however, that we do not consider the Constitution of Azerbaijan to be an obstacle to the peace agreement, for the simple reason that the agreed part of the draft peace agreement between Armenia and Azerbaijan contains wording that resolves the problem and that wording is as follows: “none of the parties may invoke the provisions of its internal legislation as justification for its failure to perform the present agreement”. Therefore, the signing of the agreement will address the concerns of both Armenia and Azerbaijan and will create legal guarantees to fundamentally address them.
When we examine the agreed text of the peace agreement in terms of compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, the following picture emerges. Under the Constitution of Armenia, agreements that contradict the Constitution may not be ratified. And as in other cases, after signing the peace agreement with Azerbaijan, we must submit it to the Constitutional Court to verify that the agreement complies with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia. If our Constitutional Court decides that the peace agreement with Azerbaijan is in contradiction with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, even though our experts assure us that it is not likely to happen, then we will face a specific situation in which constitutional changes will be needed for the sake of achieving peace.
And if our Constitutional Court decides that the agreement complies with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, then there will be no barriers for ratification in the Parliament of Armenia, and here an extremely important circumstance comes in. Under paragraph 3 of article 5 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, ratified international agreements have precedence over the domestic legislation of the Republic of Armenia, and, therefore, after the signing and ratification of the peace agreement with Azerbaijan, theoretically, even if there were laws that could be interpreted as containing territorial claims, those documents would be subordinate to the Armenia-Azerbaijan peace agreement and would automatically have no legal force. The same logic would apply to Azerbaijan, of course.
As members can see, here is peace, so close to us, and all we need to do is reach out and take it. It is not easy for either Armenia or Azerbaijan, because both of us have our own truth, and the debate over those truths has led to enmity, casualties and wars. The pain is very deep and intense, but we must now focus on peace, because peace is the only truth understandable to the people of Armenia and Azerbaijan. And that truth will open our eyes and shut down the sources of enmity, and we will all look to the future.
The Crossroads of Peace project of the Government of the Republic of Armenia is also dedicated to that future. The purpose of the project is not only to open automobile routes, railroads and other transport communications between Armenia and Azerbaijan, but also to provide communication between Armenia, Azerbaijan, Türkiye and the entire region, as well as to create opportunities for the passage of pipelines and cables and, eventually, provide opportunities for people-to-people contacts, which is a key and critical factor for peacemaking.
A key factor for peace and development is also that all this shall happen with due respect for the sovereignty, jurisdiction and territorial integrity of the countries, on the basis of the principles of equality and reciprocity, and we are ready to open our transport communications to both Azerbaijan and Türkiye, as well as to our other neighbours and partners. We are even ready to do it today, right away.
In addition, the Crossroads of Peace can become a part of the Middle Corridor, ensuring greater speed and efficiency of the passage of goods through it. The Republic of Armenia is ready to fully ensure the safety of the passage of cargo, vehicles and people on its territory. It is our wish and our commitment, and we can do it. By the way, all those claims that Armenia has agreed somewhere, in some document, that third forces shall provide the security of communications on its territory are simply distortions of reality. Armenia’s commitment is clear: to guarantee the safety of cargo, vehicles and people on its territory, and we do guarantee it.
Today I do not want to send any negative, worrisome or pessimistic messages, not because they do not exist, but because, as an Armenian proverb says, “let us speak positively, in order to be well”, meaning that when one speaks positively, good things tend to become reality. It may be that there is a similar saying in Azerbaijan, Türkiye, Iran, Georgia and other countries in the world, and they all consider it their own. But “let us speak positively, in order to be well”, is not about saying empty words. Of course, one should work hard and sometimes make hard decisions. In my speech, I laid out all the circumstances that give me reason to speak positively, to be well in front of this distinguished audience. And if we rely on those circumstances, good things will happen, initiating a process of reducing the circumstances that generate the negative.
