It is a rare occasion when the person presiding over the General Assembly and the person here at the rostrum are both Austrians.
When we met in this Hall last year, many, including myself, referred to the challenging times that we were facing. A world riddled with uncertainty, growing divisions, rising insecurity, a backsliding on hard-earned development goals and a backlash against the universality of human rights. Looking back on the past 12 months, we must admit that the sense of being in a permanent state of emergency has actually not decreased. On the contrary, it has even deepened.
Russia is relentlessly pursuing its full-scale war of aggression against Ukraine — a violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the most basic rules that we all in this room agreed upon, that still is shocking today. My country, Austria, is a militarily neutral country, but neutrality does not mean, and never meant, indifference. We know very well that a world in which Russia succeeds in shifting borders with tanks and rockets is a world that is a lot more dangerous for all of us. After 946 days of unspeakable human suffering and destruction, it is high time to return to diplomacy. Nobody wants and nobody deserves peace more than the people in Ukraine, but a negotiated peace, not a dictate from Moscow. I am actually encouraged by the conversations that I had in this room over the last couple of weeks with many partners, some from far beyond Europe’s borders. I am encouraged that no matter where we stand geographically, politically or as far as ideology is concerned, we can all agree on the most basic principles of international law: those principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter. They should be the bedrock of any negotiation leading to a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine. And let me be very clear: there cannot and should not be any negotiations on Ukraine without Ukraine.
In the Middle East, the barbaric terror attack of Hamas against Israel has brought a new dimension of devastation to a region not lacking in violence. Israelis are traumatized by the slaughter, torture and sexual violence of 7 October 2023. Hostages are still held captive by terrorists, including an Austrian father of two small children. And Palestinians in Gaza are facing starvation and disease in what can only be described as a humanitarian tragedy. All of this is truly heartbreaking.
International humanitarian law, to be very clear, is non-negotiable. It applies everywhere, at all times, for everybody. The protection of civilians must be paramount. We need a ceasefire to get the hostages out of Gaza and humanitarian aid into Gaza, and we need the ceasefire now. What we definitely do not need is any side adding fuel to the fire. It is wishful thinking to believe that a full-scale escalation between Israel and Hizbullah could be controlled. The result would be a firestorm engulfing the whole region and beyond, and in the end, everyone would lose.
I still believe that there are enough reasonable voices and forces in the region wanting to work towards a lasting political solution, a solution enabling us to continue with the normalization between Israel and the Arab world, a solution by which we can finally realize the two-State solution — in my eyes, the only feasible and imaginable solution allowing Israelis and Palestinians to live side by side in peace and security.
Other crisis hotspots are equally disastrous, but they get too little public attention. In the Sudan, famine looms for millions of people, but the generals care more about power than their own people. Meanwhile in Haiti, stabilization is slow to come after a total collapse of the State. Amid all of this, humankind itself is facing fundamental questions with accelerating climate change, environmental disasters and the rise of artificial intelligence.
There is no sugar-coating it: we are living in times of uncertainty, compounded by rising political, economic and ideological tensions. We see shifts and cracks — bilaterally, regionally and on the multilateral level. I recently came across a statement that is very simple but that is true. In the past, we actually believed that we knew our future. Well, my friends, that bubble of wishful thinking has burst once and for all. The pendulum is swinging from global integration towards global fragmentation. Isolationism, protectionism and nationalism are on the rise. A zero-sum mentality is spreading, tempting us to divide partners and countries into either “you are with me or you are against me”, or even into ghosting or cancelling others, as if foreign policy worked like social media. Around the globe, there are entire legions of doomsday prophets, forces at the fringes of the political spectrum capitalizing on people’s doubts and fears. Their business model is quick fixes and apparent easy answers. Their agenda is sowing discord.
And yes, Austria is no exception. This coming Sunday, we will have parliamentary elections in my country. And also in Austria, some political forces are offering tempting but false solutions, even deliberately echoing the narratives of those forces that are trying to weaken our open and pluralistic societies and that are working against a strong and united Europe.
To counter that, we need a strong centre. We need to keep our nerve and stay on message. We need to make sure that this era of doubt and anxiety does not become an era of fear. We all know that fear is a poor guide, especially in politics. Yes, our global order is changing. Yes, the world has become more complex. Some would even say it has become more frightening. But I am deeply convinced that we have to stand up and defend the rules-based international system, and we have to defend it with all means at our disposal. We must not be afraid to take a clear stance. It is worth defending. Because it is and remains the best — and, I would even say, the only — guarantee for our security, for our stability and for our prosperity. For countries like Austria, it is paramount. We are dependent on this system, a system that respects the rule of law, a system that respects international law, a system that honours the principle of pacta sunt servanda, and a system where might does not make right. And it is an illusion to believe that there is anything to gain from demolishing or undermining the rules-based international system. If we lose it, everybody in this Hall will lose.
I am not denying that we are in the midst of a systemic rivalry. There are some actors who consider open and democratic societies not only as a challenge, but even as a threat. However, in the face of the turmoil and upheavals of the past few years, societies based on freedom, pluralism and individual rights have proven themselves stronger, more adaptive, more flexible and more resilient than most of us even believed ourselves.
What we need most now, in this moment, is trust and confidence — trust in our own capacities, trust in our own principles. Therefore, my appeal today is very clear: let us be more confident in our own strength. Austria will always be ready to defend its own interests, its values and its principles. But at the same time, we will always have the courage to look for the middle ground, to search for compromise, because we know that defending our multilateral system and defending our rules-based international order means reforming it. Our system of global governance is simply not delivering anymore. It is not inclusive enough. The Security Council, as it stands now, reflects a world that is long gone. And I believe it is actually unacceptable that we are held hostage so easily by the will of a handful of countries. We, as Austrians, and the Austrian Government commit ourselves to making the Security Council more effective, more inclusive and more accountable, including through our candidature for a non-permanent seat at elections in 2026.
Austria will continue to champion a sensible and pragmatic multilateralism, based on our genuine will for compromise and for dialogue. Despite the current fragmentation of the global order, our world will simply remain interdependent. We will not be able to raise the drawbridges, to decouple, to cancel or to ghost, as some would have us believe. That is magical thinking. We need to face the challenges and complexities of our times head-on and together, with a healthy dose of realism and more confidence in our own capacities, principles and strength.
