I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and thank the outgoing President, Mr. Dennis Francis, for his outstanding efforts in leading the previous session.
I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his continuous efforts to achieve the noble objectives of the United Nations.
The world continues to grapple with a wide range of challenges that no single country can overcome alone. The worsening global climate crisis, rising inequalities, emerging divides and heightened tensions affect us all, irrespective of our background or location. It is high time to demonstrate that multilateralism works and can deliver with a unified voice, leaving no one behind. The current state of international politics is divisive, with universally accepted fundamental norms and principles of international law being disregarded and misinterpreted.
In the face of the continued erosion of multilateralism, it is paramount that the United Nations continue to foster international solidarity and cooperation. The principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations constitute the foundational normative framework of international relations and must be applied consistently, not selectively. The United Nations is mandated to ensure that every nation has an equal voice and is treated on the same footing. In that regard, Azerbaijan advocates for a reinvigorated and reformed multilateral system, with the United Nations at its core, underpinned by strict adherence to and the non-selective application of the universally accepted norms and principles of international law.
Urgent progress is needed on Security Council reform, based on the work done and the gains achieved in good faith and a spirit of flexibility, constructiveness and cooperation.
We view the pivotal Summit of the Future, held a week ago, as a renewal of our common commitment to international law, the United Nations Charter, multilateralism and international cooperation. The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), its negotiated outcome, is a blueprint for building a better, more sustainable and prosperous world for everyone. It is time for our collective commitments to turn into real and decisive action.
The global climate crisis threatens decades of progress, imperils humankind’s future and disproportionally affects vulnerable countries. The growing divisions in international relations should not distract us from the imperative to address climate change, the greatest transnational challenge of the century. What has been done so far remains insufficient to limit global temperature rise to 1.5°C. For the sake of the future, the time has come for urgent, concerted and sustained efforts to give effect to our commitments to a global vision for sustainable development.
In November, Azerbaijan will host the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP29). Guided by the call “In solidarity for a green world”, Azerbaijan will spare no effort to bring developed and developing countries together and foster a collaborative spirit to tackle climate challenges as a common commitment and moral duty. The confidence placed in us by the international community to host and preside over COP29 this year is a testament and recognition to Azerbaijan’s readiness to lead the climate agenda and contribute to global climate action.
As the incoming presidency, Azerbaijan reaffirms its commitment to delivering COP29 in a transparent, impartial, inclusive and party-driven manner. We have presented our vision based on two parallel pillars to enhance ambition and enable action, with climate finance as our top priority this year. Those pillars are mutually reinforcing; progress on each sends a strong signal supporting the other. The primary expectation for the COP29 presidency is an agreement on a fair and ambitious new collective quantified goal (NCQG) on climate finance. That will be the first major climate finance goal after adopting the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and we have been working tirelessly to support the parties in landing a deal. The COP29 presidency has made it clear that agreeing on a fair and ambitious NCQG that is adequate to the urgency and scale of the problem and takes into account the needs and priorities of developing countries is the ultimate test of the parties’ commitment to the Paris Agreement and climate action in the years ahead. We need to continue to work constructively on the NCQG and steer the process to a successful outcome at the COP29.
The COP 29 presidency is also working with the parties to deliver an outcome on carbon markets this year. Fully functioning carbon markets will be a significant step in implementing nationally determined contributions (NDCs) cost-effectively and in bolstering ambition for mitigation. Moreover, we have put forward 14 initiatives covering topics such as the link between climate action and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), green energy zones and corridors, energy storage, harmony for climate resilience, agriculture, clean hydrogen, methane reduction from organic waste, green digital action and more. One of the initiatives under the COP29 Action Agenda includes the establishment of the Climate Finance Action Fund, an innovative source for climate finance to be voluntarily supported by fossil fuel-producing countries and companies.
COP29 will also be an opportunity to set differences aside and contribute to global peace and the climate agenda. Given the intersection of conflicts and the increasingly challenging climate crisis, Azerbaijan has introduced a flagship COP29 truce initiative, embedded in the Joint Solemn Appeal announced a few days ago. More than 1,000 non-governmental organizations, faith leaders and prominent personalities, as well as many parties, have already joined the Appeal. We call on everyone to transcend political divergences, stand in unity and respect the truce during the month of COP29.
Azerbaijan has always been at the forefront of promoting international peace and security, interreligious and intercultural dialogue, contributing to the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda and fostering global solidarity and multilateralism. The Azerbaijani chairmanship of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries from 2019 to 2023 was marked by the Movement’s enhanced role and increased contributions to a collaborative spirit in international relations. Under the visionary leadership of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, decisive steps were taken to enhance international solidarity and galvanize the collective response to global challenges at a time of erosion of multilateralism. Guided by the noble call to leave no one behind, Azerbaijan continues to lend its support to developing countries in need. Since 2020, we have provided humanitarian, economic and technical assistance worth $330 million to over 140 nations.
As we pass the halfway mark of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we observe stagnation in its implementation. With only 17 per cent of SDG targets on track, we need urgent and accelerated progress. At the national level, we are taking necessary measures to implement the SDGs and setting an example for others to follow. We have fully embraced the SDGs nationally, prioritizing 17 goals, 88 targets and 119 indicators. That has been achieved through collaborative and inclusive process involving civil society, the business community, youth and other key stakeholders. Azerbaijan’s gross domestic product (GDP) has risen fourfold in less than two decades. Poverty has gone down from 49 per cent to 5 per cent. The external public debt is expected to be some 7 per cent of the GDP for 2024, one of the lowest globally.
Clean environment and green growth are among the five priority areas of our new national development strategy. In line with that, Azerbaijan is looking into ways of achieving further greenhouse gas emission reductions and working on its 1.5°C aligned NDC. A few months ago, we joined the 2030 Global Methane Pledge. We will also establish green energy zones and achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 in the Garabagh and Eastern Zangazur regions.
Azerbaijan will continue to play an essential role in global energy security, contributing to sustainable development and the eradication of poverty and helping millions to transition to clean energy in the region and beyond. The share of renewables in the total installed electrical capacity in Azerbaijan will reach 30 per cent by 2030. That high target has been established primarily to improve energy efficiency and introduce innovative solutions in the urban environment, trans port systems and industry. The projected increase in renewable electricity production in the coming years will allow Azerbaijan to become an exporter of green electricity to European countries through the landmark transregional Black Sea Submarine Cable project.
In the face of increasing challenges, coming together in unity and solidarity and fostering dialogue and mutual understanding is an absolute necessity. With a centuries-long tradition of diversity and multiculturalism, Azerbaijan firmly believes in dialogue and the collaborative spirit, mutual understanding and respect among different cultures and religions. Azerbaijan has placed particular focus on the promotion of a culture of peace and encouraging intercultural and interreligious dialogue worldwide, including through the Baku Process and Peace4Culture initiatives.
The end of armed conflict with Armenia and the restoration of Azerbaijan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity have created a substantially new environment in the South Caucasus. For the first time in decades, stability has been achieved on the ground and de facto peace established. By putting an end to military occupation, it is Azerbaijan that created the conditions for both parties to eventually turn the page of enmity and embark on good-neighbourly relations.
That process was launched by Azerbaijan in the immediate aftermath of its victory in the 44-day Patriotic War. The offer was made despite the fact that unhealed wounds from the conflict still persist to date in the form of the dozens of cities and hundreds of towns and villages that have been razed to the ground, the destruction and desecration of each and every piece of historical and cultural heritage and the barbaric pillage of natural resources. Azerbaijan has demonstrated political wisdom and goodwill by offering Armenia peace on equal terms, fully in line with the norms and principles of international law, on the basis of mutual recognition of and respect for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Over the past year, Azerbaijan and Armenia have registered significant progress in the normalization process through direct bilateral negotiations, in particular with respect to drafting a bilateral agreement, the delimitation and demarcation of the State border and the elaboration of a set of confidence-building measures. Azerbaijan will continue to take that process forward acting with a strong sense of responsibility for not only its national security and well-being, but also for ensuring a better future for the entire region. Our commitment and determination remain intact to bring the process to its logical conclusion.
For the finalization of the normalization process, Armenia has yet to legally abandon its territorial claims against Azerbaijan once and for all by implementing constitutional amendments. Armenia’s negligence with respect to the implementation of constitutional amendments, combined with a dramatic increase in its military budget, its acquisition of a large amount of offensive weaponry from both traditional and new suppliers, and its attempts to maintain obsolete conflict-driven narratives and structures, is derailing the normalization process. The establishment of peace and good-neighbourly relations cannot be sustainable and irreversible if recognition of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan remains in legal limbo or is contingent on domestic legal or political scenarios. Partial peace is not an option after so much pain and suffering inflicted by irredentism and territorial claims against neighbours. At this critical moment, Azerbaijan calls for expeditious steps to address the remaining impediments to the finalization of the normalization process with a full sense of responsibility.
Along with Armenia’s responsibility to honour its international obligations and previously undertaken commitments, it is also incumbent on the entire international community to encourage the sides to establish genuine, sustainable and irreversible peace. Such a peace should outweigh any dividend that might be expected by manipulating one side against the other or building dividing lines between them. Practices that brought devastation to other parts of the globe must cease to be projected to the South Caucasus by feeding revanchism.
Ensuring justice with respect to serious war crimes and crimes against humanity is of vital importance in terms of healing the wounds of the past conflict. While accountability and redress serve to ensure the rights and interests of the victims, they are also key prerequisites on the path to genuine post-conflict normalization and reconciliation. In that regard, it is of paramount importance to shed light on the fate of about 4,000 Azerbaijanis who have gone missing due to the conflict. Resolving that issue is essential not only in terms of accountability and the rights of the victims and their families, but also for post-conflict reconciliation and normalization.
Around 300,000 Azerbaijanis expelled from Armenia continue to be deprived of their ancestral homeland, in blatant violation of international law. Despite repeated calls by the western Azerbaijan community to launch a dialogue and ensure a safe and dignified return to the homeland, the Government of Armenia is preventing them from exercising their fundamental right of return enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and other important international acts.
Along with the inter-State process of normalization, Azerbaijan has internally embarked on large-scale post-conflict rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts aimed at ensuring the right of hundreds of thousands of Azerbaijanis to eventually exercise their violated right to a safe and dignified return to their homes. Thanks to the tireless efforts made by the Government, life is now returning to territories that witnessed unprecedented destruction during the military occupation.
Regrettably, the massive contamination of territories of Azerbaijan by landmines and other explosive devices remains a significant obstacle to the smooth progress of rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts. Since the end of the conflict in 2020, 377 individuals, including civilians, have fallen victim to landmines. With that in mind, Azerbaijan has introduced a national goal, SDG18, focusing on mine action. Given the scale of the problem, there is an urgent need for increased international support to strengthen Azerbaijan’s humanitarian mine-action capacity. I take this opportunity to thank all countries and other stakeholders that have generously contributed to humanitarian demining in Azerbaijan and reiterate our call for increased international support and solidarity.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Azerbaijan’s commitment to further contributing to international peace and security by promoting respect for international law and investing in international solidarity and cooperation. We remain a strong proponent of combined efforts to overcome challenges and pave the way for a brighter future for ourselves and the generations to come.
