It is a great honour and a privilege for me to address the Assembly on behalf of Mr. Evariste Ndayishimiye, President of the Republic of Burundi, who could not be with us this morning and who has honoured me to represent him in these meetings to raise the voice and position of Burundi on the global challenges facing the world today.
Allow me, Mr. President, to offer you my warm congratulations on your outstanding election to the presidency of the General Assembly at this session. Your wisdom, your long and rich political and diplomatic experience, your high sense of listening and your qualities as a seasoned negotiator are for us the guarantee of the success of these meetings. You can always count on the full support and cooperation of Burundi throughout your mandate.
Your predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis, deserves equal admiration and recognition for having invested himself in the accomplishment of his mission with brilliance during the session that we have just closed.
At the same time, I address a well-earned tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres for his services to humankind through his courageous action in progress to make the United Nations an Organization close to the people, despite the complex global context in which it operates.
The President’s slogan for this session, “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”, is all the more timely as the world we live in today is moving rapidly towards disunity and the questioning of the values of peace, solidarity and mutual understanding. That disunity is coupled with a new type of radicalism that prevents Member States from agreeing on how to tackle global challenges in a spirit of compromise and mutual trust.
Indeed, today more than ever, most of us act as if we were alone in the world and as if others did not exist or did not matter. Solidarity has become a rare commodity at the very moment when we need it most. The undermining of positive values throughout the world has become the currency of choice. However, we know that all conflicts that the world has known, be they direct or proxy, proceed from the same logic — the denial of others, their interests and their very identity, be they cultural, religious or civilizational. In short, the loss of trust, tensions around geostrategic positions and deliberate disinformation are polarizing countries and paralysing societies across the world at an increasingly worrying pace.
As is necessarily appropriate in such cases, my country, Burundi, strongly condemns all those who seek to impose on others their points of view, their practices or their own values and thoughts through muscle diplomacy and political conditionalities of development aid, while forgetting that the world is plural and that difference in diversity is a great asset and a driving force for development for economic growth and the flourishing of our societies. Properly understood at its true value, diversity in all its dimensions is a source of varied possibilities, opportunities and inspirations. The wealth of points of view, experiences and lessons learned brings a variety of ideas, knowledge, understanding and acceptance of others that can significantly improve a society’s ability to prosper, to understand the different perspectives of the contemporary world in which we live, and thus to live in peace and harmony with its immediate and distant environment.
As we know, cultural diversity and values constitute a powerful lever for building links beyond differences. They unite populations and thereby support social cohesion, peace, security and peaceful coexistence. Despite that unifying function, the past 20 years have been marked by the increasing instrumentalization of culture and values for the purposes of division and tension. Because of their significance and intrinsic connection with populations, cultural diversity and the values we hold dear have increasingly been placed at the forefront of conflicts and used as a tool of division, even a weapon of war, above all to dominate weakened societies, particularly in the most fragile regions of the world. That self-centred exploitation of culture and values has contributed not only to the prolongation of crises and conflicts, but also to deterring the exercise of human rights, including economic, social and cultural rights. Today more than ever, bridging the gap among cultures, values and civilizations is urgent and necessary to establish peace, stability, solidarity and inclusive development that leaves no one behind.
The world we live in today needs more than ever a consensual approach to face such major challenges as raging conflicts, intensifying natural disasters and climate change, omnipresent poverty and inequalities, the mistrust and dissensions that divide the world, the crumbling spirit of compromise and waning international solidarity, not to mention the Sustainable Development Goals, which are very far from being achieved.
With regard to its role in building a better future and a world order based on the rule of law — a peaceful, equitable, prosperous and united world — Burundi, my country, is pursuing its ambition to strengthen relations of friendship and cooperation based on the principle of mutual respect and the sovereign equality of States to make Burundi a country that is a friend to all and an enemy to none. Burundi is a true supporter of a multilateralism in which all countries, regardless of their size and level of development, have a role to play in addressing the challenges of the moment that President Yang and the Secretary-General have already rightly mentioned. In that regard, Burundi opposes the unilateral measures imposed by certain actors, which can lead to the erosion and destruction of the social fabric in the targeted countries.
As for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, if nothing is done to reverse the current trends we will gradually move towards the renunciation of the promise made to humankind in 2015 in this very Hall. With only six years to go before the deadline, the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024 clearly shows that only 17 per cent to 18 per cent of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are on track, nearly half have made little or moderate progress, while more than a third have stagnated or even regressed. Faced with such an alarming situation, we, the people, have no more time to lose. Let us act together and quickly to save the future generation, which will judge us by our actions in the event of inaction.
It is supremely crucial that the international community redouble its efforts to address the various needs and challenges encountered, with a particular focus on countries in special situations, such as least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, with the aim of reversing the trend and the hope to leave no one behind, as we collectively decided in 2015 through the 2030 Agenda.
At the national level, Burundi, like all other nations, is working hard to significantly improve the quality of life of its population. The Burundian people firmly believe that the only path that will lead them to true political independence necessarily passes through economic independence. To that end, the Government of Burundi, under the enlightened leadership of the President of the Republic, Mr. Evariste Ndayishimiye, is committed to making the peace and security already achieved profitable, has set out in the ambitious and achievable vision of making Burundi an emerging country by 2040 and a developed country by 2060. The goal sought in that reference document is to build a nation characterized by the well-being of the population, a sustained increase in production and structural changes leading to an increase in life expectancy, the satisfaction of basic needs and the reduction of unemployment and poverty in all its forms, dimensions and manifestations. By 2040, Burundi plans to be a peaceful country where everyone lives in decent conditions and no one dies from an avoidable cause, and with a competitive economy driven by the agrifood and industrial sectors with high added value and by mining for the benefit of society, all in a preserved natural environment and with consideration of the gender dimension and equity.
In matters of peace and security, Burundi, always siding with solutions and not with problems, reiterates its commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflicts throughout the world with the tools that preventive diplomacy puts at our disposal, namely, dialogue, cooperation, consultation and negotiation. Representatives are well aware that without peace, no development is possible, and that without development peace becomes utopian, both being two sides of the same coin.
The terrorist threat and the dangers associated with violent extremism have grown in recent years, with increasing ramifications at the local, regional and international levels. Faced with that existential threat, Burundi is committed to maintaining and strengthening its collaboration with other nations to prevent and combat terrorism and violent extremism through its substantial contribution to peace operations and the fight against terrorism, particularly in Somalia, the Central African Republic and the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to support those brother countries in their legitimate efforts to restore peace and State authority throughout their territories.
The climate crisis is besetting the planet before our very eyes and sustainable solutions are slow to come, due to a lack of financing for climate action capable of helping countries of the global South to face the threefold planetary crisis of climate change, pollution and loss of biodiversity. Burundi, like other countries of the subregion, is increasingly affected by climate change, despite its minimal contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions. The frequency of climatic phenomena such as floods, landslides, drought and the rise in the level of Lake Tanganyika is increasing. Those events disrupt agricultural cycles, leading to crop losses, food insecurity and the degradation of local ecosystems. We advocate a simplification of deadlines to allow seriously impacted countries to receive green financing to limit the adverse effects of climate change on the implementation of the SDGs.
To contribute to the climate edifice, Burundi, like other signatory countries of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, has committed itself through its nationally determined contributions document and has integrated environmental protection, strengthened resilience to climate change and food security into its national policies and its Emerging Country in 2040 and Developed Country in 2060 vision.
As we know, climate hazards affect more than the physical environment; they also affect the good health of populations. To that end, Burundi has taken health measures into account in its climate change mitigation plan and broken the record in the recent report of the Global Climate Change Alliance by climbing to the top of the list of countries that have most comprehensively taken the health of the population into account in their mitigation plan. Moreover, several initiatives for the protection and restoration of landscapes have been taken, including a vast national reforestation programme called Ewe Burundi Urambaye — Green Burundi — the promotion of agroforestry and the tracing of contour lines with the involvement of all sections of the population.
I now come to the issue of human rights on the list of challenges to be met. For Burundi, dignity — as highlighted in our central theme — begins with the promotion and protection of human rights, which are universal, indivisible, interdependent and closely linked. My country, Burundi, firmly believes that human rights must be strengthened through adherence to the fundamental principles of universality, transparency, impartiality, non-selectivity, non-politicization and objectivity, as well as the rejection of the practice of double standards. The special mechanisms sometimes imposed to regulate geopolitics in certain regions of the world must give way to dialogue and cooperation.
In that context, Burundi must be treated fairly by the Human Rights Council in Geneva and calls on certain actors to avoid continually saddling us with special political mechanisms without any added value in terms of the enjoyment of human rights in all their components. In that regard, I encourage the initiators of such projects — they know who they are — to withdraw the initiative to extend the mandate of the so-called Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in Burundi, because such an attitude, which seeks to regulate domestic politics in Burundi, generates unnecessary and above all avoidable tensions between our country and the initiators of that politically motivated, cynical and immoral project.
International migration is a worldwide reality that has been around ever since the world was created. It affects our countries, our communities, migrants and their families in different and sometimes unpredictable ways. Burundi recognizes the need for a global approach to human mobility and strengthened bilateral, regional and international cooperation with a view to facilitating safe, orderly and regular migration. At the national level, Burundi is signing cooperation agreements with destination countries on labour migration. That cooperative approach seeks to ensure the legal, social and human rights protection of migrant workers and thereby to significantly counter the traffic in human beings.
The issue of multilateralism has been the subject of particular attention since the opening of our session. After 79 years of existence of the United Nations, the shared observation is that despite its limitations, which everyone knows, multilateralism has contributed to bringing undeniable results to certain global problems. Let us acknowledge them. The most recent example that multilateralism is not dead and buried was the adoption by consensus in this very Hall, on 22 September, of our Pact for the Future and its annexes (resolution 79/1), a concise and action-oriented document.
However, despite that encouraging result, there are early signs of the progressive weakening of the spirit of compromise and indifference to collective rules. In an increasingly globalized world, where interdependence is robust, no State, however powerful, can hope to resolve all the challenges it faces alone. States must preserve and strengthen mutual commitment and adopt a more coordinated approach, based on the rules of the game, to avoid unilateral actions that, as we all know, often manifest themselves in the form of blatant interference in the internal affairs of other countries, in violation of the principles and values conveyed by the Charter of the United Nations.
Regarding the reform of the Security Council, the endless negotiations of which have become elastic, my country Burundi, through me, reaffirms its commitment to the Common African Position reflected in the Ezulwini Consensus. It cannot be said often enough that the current multilateral system is showing its limits in effectively ensuring global governance. The notorious and atrocious injustice committed against Africa, the only continent absent from the Security Council in the category of permanent membership and inadequately represented in the category of non-permanent membership, must end. Seeking to perpetuate the exclusion of more than 1.2 billion inhabitants from the table where major decisions concerning them are taken is an attitude that is simply unacceptable.
Access to information in a universal, equitable and financially affordable manner, as well as to the instruments providing access to it, is also one of the major challenges of modern times. The Internet claims to represent a relationship of rapprochement between spaces and peoples, but the so-called spider web favours rich countries while developing countries are still poorly connected, particularly in Africa. At a time when the world and trade are becoming increasingly digital, it is becoming imperative for all countries to have access to the Internet, including artificial intelligence, which is revolutionizing the world as we speak. The increasingly widening and gaping abyss between the countries of the global North and the global South is causing the latter to lose a large number of social, scientific and economic opportunities. As leaving no one behind is one of the pillars of United Nations action, it is more than urgent that the digital divide be bridged in the legitimate interest of current and future generations.
I cannot conclude without informing the Assembly of and, above all, without reiterating Burundi’s commitment to implementing the theme “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”.
