As leaders from around the world flock to the United Nations this week, they should have only one ambition — to find a way out of the conflicts in the Sudan, the Middle East, Ukraine and all too many other places. The conflicts are close to our homes and cities, bringing war, famine and terrible tragedies to families and societies. When we take a brief look back in time, history teaches us a lesson. After Andrei Sakharov developed the first Soviet hydrogen bomb in 1955, he was seriously troubled by the nuclear arms race and Soviet doctrine. He saw that human rights and human dignity were an absolute necessity — a precondition — not just for nuclear security but for the prevention of war. The fight for human rights defined him and turned him into an international advocate, culminating 20 years later in his being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. In its remarks, the Nobel Committee noted that Sakharov fought against the abuse of power and every form of violation of human dignity. Looking at the world today, it is crucial to remember Sakharov’s legacy. Across the globe, human dignity and the rule of law are receding, and in many cases they are absent. And where respect for human life and the promise of the rule of law fades, armed conflicts loom large. History may not repeat itself, but it surely rhymes.
In the Middle East, decades of dehumanizing the enemy have led to a vicious cycle of violence, resulting in the killing of more than 40,000 people in less than a year. That human-made conflict has proved to be one of the deadliest in decades. While it did not start with the horrific terrorist attack that killed more than 1,400 Israeli citizens almost a year ago, on 7 October 2023 Belgium immediately acknowledged Israel’s right to defend itself and called for the unconditional release of all hostages. Early on in the Gaza war, my Government warned against the lack of respect on both sides for international humanitarian law, and against the disproportionate attacks, with blatant disregard for Palestinian civilians’ lives. Almost a year later, we must sadly acknowledge that the extremes on both sides still set the tone of the conflict. Fanatics believe that military power can end it. That is a delusion. To achieve peace, we need a proper road map and political courage, not mere tactics to remain in power another day. We have been calling for an immediate and lasting ceasefire for many months, but today it seems more distant than ever. The hostilities have to stop before the whole region becomes engulfed in violence. Actions speak louder than words.
Belgium has imposed an arms embargo. We have never ceased our support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other humanitarian organizations. Together with the European Union we have imposed sanctions on Hamas, as well as on extremist settlers and settler organizations. With every innocent life lost in Gaza and every discovery of a dead hostage, the prospects of future peace may seem more distant than ever. Today Gaza lies in rubble. More than 15,000 people need prosthetics because they have lost limbs, and 10,000 of them are children. Where is the human dignity in all of this? However, there is a way out. I am convinced that it starts with recognition of both Israel and Palestine’s right to exist, based on the 1967 borders. We should all engage with Palestinian and Israeli leaders who recognize those rights and oppose both antisemitism and anti-Palestinian feelings. Only then can we start to articulate a viable pathway for a two-State solution.
Vladimir Putin has been waging war in Europe for more than two years. And there is one simple truth. He can stop the illegal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine right now. His madness continues to have devastating consequences for the Ukrainian people. One man alone can stop the killing of thousands of civilians and can end the continuing violence against the Ukrainians, whose future has been put on hold. Only he can end the shelling, the bombing and the indiscriminate attacks on bridges, roads, energy infrastructure, hospitals, schools and people’s houses. The widespread and disturbing brutality has been documented by various independent international inquiries, and none of us can, or should, look away.
Over the past year the Belgian Ukraine fund has spent €1.7 billion on military equipment and humanitarian aid and on rebuilding Ukraine’s hardest-hit regions. Belgium’s development agency is helping Ukraine’s recovery and its preparations for joining the European Union. The people of Ukraine will soon be battling another cold winter. That is why we are winterizing the provision of energy in hundreds of hospitals. Over the past two years we have often said the words, “For as long as it takes”. We do not take that promise lightly. As the Russians continue to bomb cities, Ukraine’s call for more air defence is pure self-protection. How else can they keep their citizens safe? The build-up of a strong Ukraine F-16 force is an integral part of our support. We will transfer all our fighter jets as they leave the Belgian Air Force. The total will amount to at least 30 over the coming years. We want to help protect the people of Ukraine. The aggressor shall not win, and that is why our support for Ukraine stands strong. To all who aspire to peace, it will come about only when we force President Putin to stop his aggression against Ukraine.
Clearly we live in a polarized and deeply divided world. That might lead us to believe that multilateralism has failed at every level, which would be a mistake. A year ago, the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity Beyond National Jurisdiction was adopted (resolution 78/272). That collective initiative is proof that it is still possible for us to unite in the face of a climate and environmental emergency. Another example of progress has been the global response to mpox and that of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention to the epidemic. The European Union and Belgium have invested significantly in vaccine production and access in Africa. And we need more solidarity and cooperation.
Those words may sound idealistic and naive, but we can overcome our common challenges only by working together. Extreme weather events are proliferating around the world, and, just last week, heavy rains caused flooding in large parts of Eastern and Central Europe. Our planet and all its life forms are facing enormous challenges. However, this is no time to despair and lower our expectations. On the contrary, human ingenuity, sustainable competition and meaningful changes in behaviour can mitigate the effects of climate change and help us adapt. We have redoubled our efforts to increase our ambitions vis-à-vis the climate and the oceans. We are ready to work with our partners, particularly in the most vulnerable African countries, by providing funding and building their capacity. This autumn, the sixteenth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, to be held in Cali, and the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Baku, will once again be key moments for the future of people of the planet.
In all these years, the talk of conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping has multiplied. Unfortunately, that has not stopped conflicts from becoming more numerous, deadly and enduring. The number of aid workers killed has reached record highs. The number of refugees continues to rise year after year. Our common humanity seems to be in a deep crisis, which brings me back to the lessons that Andrei Sakharov taught us. Where human rights and human dignity are absent, conflicts loom large and the most vulnerable bear the brunt. A new beginning, which the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) calls for, must therefore start with our recommitment to the Charter of the United Nations, the rule of law and respect for human dignity.
