It is with a great sense of honour that I stand before the General Assembly today, on this emblematic rostrum of the United Nations, on behalf of President Patrice Talon, President of the Republic of Benin.
Allow me at the outset of my remarks to reaffirm the unwavering commitment of the Beninese people to democracy, political stability and the principle of the peaceful transfer of power. Since the historic Conference of the Active Forces of the Nation in February 1990, Benin has chosen the path of democracy and under the leadership of successive Presidents, including current President Patrice Talon, we have been able to preserve and strengthen our institutions. Our Defence and Security Forces, with courage and republican commitment, continue to protect our territory and our institutions. Any impulse for destabilization, whether internal or external, will be defeated. Our march towards development is now irreversible.
Today, the world is facing growing tensions and uncertainty is becoming a constant of our time. Every day, we see increasing polarization, with crises everywhere undermining global cohesion and jeopardizing the future of humankind. Be they in the Sahel, the Sudan, Ukraine, the South China Sea or the Middle East, emerging conflicts are undermining global peace and stability. Those tensions bring nothing but suffering and desolation, setting off waves of poverty that affect the most fragile economies and exacerbate the vulnerability of populations.
Although Africa is often far removed from the origin of those crises, it is nonetheless deeply affected. The Sahel region in particular is today the scene of growing tensions, exacerbated by decisions taken without the consent of Africans. That instability seriously compromises our sustainable development. Even more worrisome is the fact that certain external forces are seeking to import their geopolitical rivalries into our region. Benin strongly denounces any attempt to make the Sahel a new epicentre of geopolitical struggles. Such interference fuels the breeding ground for terrorism, an abomination that we condemn without reservation. Be it in Africa or elsewhere, terrorism is unacceptable. No cause can justify the terror or the suffering and destruction that it causes.
Today, we reaffirm our commitment to African unity. More specifically in our West African region, we have the historic responsibility to preserve the age-old brotherhood that unites our peoples. Benin is ready to play its part in that battle against terrorism and for development. Our unity of action is essential regardless of the organizations to which we decide to belong. This is an opportunity for us to reaffirm the commitment to non-violence that led us to condemn the war in Ukraine, the terrorist attacks of 7 October 2023 and the escalating violence it unleashed in the Middle East, as well as all the violence that plunges our brother countries in the Sahel into mourning every day. We call on the international community to step up its efforts to restore stability through dialogue, whether in the Middle East, where the two-State solution remains the only viable path, or in Ukraine, the Great Lakes region, the Sudan, Libya or the sister Republic of Haiti.
Despite those hotbeds of tension, we must never lose sight of another major challenge that threatens the future of our world — poverty in all its forms. With five years to go until the 2030 deadline, it is painfully clear that we will not achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, but we must not give up the fight. The fight against poverty remains one of the greatest challenges of our time. Without that fight, there will be neither true peace nor lasting stability.
Africa is the future of the world. In a few decades, our continent will be home to a quarter of humankind. Our young people, bearers of immense creativity, and our natural resources are an indispensable asset for the future of the planet. If that potential is to become reality, however, we must eradicate poverty on our continent. It is urgent to act because each year of delay compromises that future. In 25 years, when most of our countries will have existed for a century, will we still be debating access to drinking water, electricity, health care and education, or will we have finally crossed the threshold that will allow every African to live in dignity? Those are the essential questions we must answer. The time for action has come.
In 2016, Benin embarked on the path of progress under the leadership of President Patrice Talon. We have taken our destiny in hand and initiated major reforms in education, healthcare and social infrastructure. Today, we are engaged on a trajectory of transformation and development. It is important that the world recognize the efforts African nations like mine, Benin, that are working for their future and taking charge of their own destiny.
If Africa is to take flight, it must also reconcile with its history and deep identity. Just as it is impossible to understand Europe without considering the influence of the Christian Church or to understand the Middle East without understanding and seeking to understand Islam, it is equally impossible to grasp the essence of Africa without fully embracing its beliefs, traditions and civilization. It is in that spirit that Benin, the motherland of Vodún culture, has taken the initiative to correct negative perceptions about that culture — our culture. We want to reveal to the world the richness of our civilization. In knowing and respecting our history, our beliefs and our culture, the world will be able to understand who we are and why Africa is essential to balance and overall development.
But respect for Africa does not stop at recognizing its past. It also involves a modern, action-oriented Pan-Africanism that is committed to reducing poverty and building a prosperous continent and that strives to replace words with action. That Pan-Africanism must translate into concrete action. How can we advocate African unity when it is easier today for a European to travel to Africa than it is for Africans themselves? Benin took the bold, courageous and Pan-African decision in 2017 to waive visas for all African nationals. That gesture is not merely symbolic; it reflects our commitment to building an Africa where every African can feel at home, everywhere on the continent.
More than ever, respect for Africa also involves recognizing its children scattered throughout the world. Our brothers and sisters in the diaspora, forcibly uprooted during the dark hours of the transatlantic slave trade, must find their place within the African community. It is time to heal those wounds and to reforge that sacred bond with those who, although physically distant, carry Africa in their hearts. Afro-descendants are not simply distant members of our family; they are our children, our brothers and our sisters. They embody an essential part of our collective identity. By recognizing their right to return, we say to them, “You have never ceased to belong to this land. Africa is your home, and we await you with open arms.”
This year marks the end of the first International Decade for People of African Descent. On this occasion, Benin has taken the historic step of unanimously adopting a law in the National Assembly that grants Beninese nationality to all Afro-descendants who want it. That act is much more than a simple symbolic gesture; it is an invitation to a common future and a vibrant call for unity and solidarity. Together, Africans, Afrodescendants of the continent and the diaspora will meet the challenges of tomorrow. Together, we will build a strong, prosperous and respected Africa.
Benin is ready to chart the course towards a united, dynamic and open Africa that takes itself in hand and is committed to fulfilling its future. The century of Africa is within reach. It depends on our ability to seize this opportunity to build an Africa where every citizen, whether born on the continent or part of the diaspora, plays a key role in our common renaissance. We are ready.
