I have the great privilege and the immense honour to convey to you, Sir, on behalf of Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso and Head of State, the fraternal and friendly greetings of the valiant people of Burkina Faso, who, despite all adversities, including the ignominy of the aggressors and enemies of peace and manipulations and interferences of all kinds, have been able to develop resilience to pursue their radiant march towards inclusive economic and social development.
I am also pleased, Mr. President, to convey to you, on behalf of the Government and the people of Burkina Faso, my warm congratulations on your brilliant election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
To your predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, I extend the congratulations of my delegation for the achievements made during his mandate in an international context particularly marked by profound divergences.
Burkina Faso fully appreciates the actions that the United Nations system and its partners, under the Secretary-General’s coordination, continue to carry out on the ground in support of the Government’s efforts. In that regard, my country welcomes the choice of the highly evocative and challenging theme of this session: “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. In evoking the theme, allow me to convey the aspirations of the Sahelian social classes in general and Burkina Faso in particular.
I am a farmer who protects and perpetuates traditions and customs. I ardently cultivate my land, which was bequeathed to me by my ancestors to feed my family and ensure its well-being. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a woman, a mother and a worthy descendant of the Princesses Yennenga and Guimbi Ouattara, endowed like other brave Sahelian women with a strength of character like no other. I would give my life to ensure the survival and development of my children, my brothers and sisters, my compatriots in a society of peace and love. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a young Burkinabé, a farmer, breeder, trader, civil servant, artist, craftsman and student — young people from all regions and all backgrounds, raised as a brave and combative youth and committed to doing my part for the development of Burkina Faso. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a child, girl or boy, from cities and villages and from internally displaced persons sites. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a Burkinabé, Malian and Nigerian soldier, a Volunteer for the Defence of the Homeland, a husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother and sister. I have taken an oath to defend my homeland with my life, to selflessly fight the enemy on the battlefield and to protect my fellow citizens against all danger. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
I am a Burkinabé living abroad, a courageous, hard-working and honest man, a native of the country of upright men. In my life far from the motherland, I participate with enthusiasm in the common struggle for peace and stability in my country and my subregion. I want to be able to live free, dignified and proud.
Those aspirations are the beacons that guide the action of the Government, whose struggle is to create a framework for the men and women of the Sahel to live free, dignified and proud.
The theme of our session, highly appreciated for its relevance, actually exhumes a fundamental concern as old as the United Nations and which is addressed by almost all the debates that have taken place here. It tell us that it is no longer really a question of thinking about what to do; it is a question of giving substance and life to our speeches through concrete action. We must go beyond words to finally act in favour of a fairer world, free of prejudices and stereotypes that tend to relegate certain peoples or certain parts of the planet to the background, condemned to wait in the dungeons of isolation and contempt for potential help, at the mercy and whim of Powers that claim to be the only ones able to set the course and pace to be followed by others.
We must refocus our efforts more on the fundamental objectives of our Organization, primarily designed to promote the well-being of populations and nations by ensuring them peace and security. That absolute urgency and necessity to co-construct and act in favour of a fairer world are all the more relevant in the current context, in which our world is dominated by persistent crises, complex conflicts and unequal economic governance that accentuate the rupture among States and the divisions among peoples, with human tragedies as corollaries.
That disastrous configuration is the result of a multilateralism at a crossroads — a multilateralism that has run out of steam and whose reputation has been frequently tarnished by the partisan and predatory actions of certain Member States that have set themselves up as masters of the world and made the submission and exploitation of other States the guiding principle of their foreign policy. We must rightly be concerned about that because the harmony and cohesion of our world are at stake. That is why Burkina Faso takes this opportunity to appeal once again to the reason and wisdom of all, particularly the Powers of our planet, to promote inclusive global governance free of hegemonic visions. It is at that price that we will restore the nobility of the United Nations.
Restoring the integrity of the territory by ensuring the security of populations and their property; rebuilding political, administrative, economic and financial governance to carry and embody the aspirations to a better life for all Burkinabés; and undertaking reforms and development actions that will lead to shared prosperity and sustainable economic and social progress are all projects launched under the leadership and foresight of Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso and Head of State.
The Burkinabé people, who have decided to assert and assume their sovereignty by putting an end to their enslavement and who have demonstrated extraordinary resilience, like all the populations of the Sahel, understand the stakes and the scope of this fight and have mobilized alongside our defence and security forces. With that unwavering support, and thanks to the patriotism, ingenuity, bravery and spirit of sacrifice of its sons and daughters, Burkina Faso is recording previously unhoped-for successes as well as highly appreciable results in the fierce fight against terrorists, who have been weaponized, remote-controlled and financed by neocolonialist Powers. I take this opportunity to pay a heartfelt tribute to all those, civilians and military, who have fallen on the battlefield and whose memory I salute.
Through strategic and visionary reforms, marked among other things by an increase in the operational capacities of the troops and the reorganization of our fighting forces on the ground, we have multiplied our means of action and achieved the salutary reconquest of areas infested by the criminals and their allies. Specifically, nearly 70 per cent of the territory is now under the control of the State, as opposed to 40 per cent in 2022. That has allowed the resettlement of displaced populations and the reopening of schools. Thus, in less than two years, our reconquest activities have allowed more than 700,000 people to return to their villages and nearly 1,500 schools to reopen their classes, offering the chance and happiness so hoped for by thousands of students to return to school and continue their academic studies.
Those results, which command admiration and arouse much hope, were possible thanks to the action of the Defence and Security Forces, the patriotic commitment of the Volunteers for the Defence of the Homeland and the firm support of the populations and the Burkinabé diaspora in a tremendous surge of solidarity. That patriotic mobilization of all components of our people made it possible to raise more than $165 million for the year 2023 alone, a figure that largely exceeded initial forecasts. That reflects the resolve of the Burkinabé people to finance and lead the noble fight against terrorists and their allies themselves.
At the very moment when we are reaping successes in our victorious offensive against obscurantist forces, agencies of dubious reputations and integrity have curiously engaged in a vast and virulent campaign of denigration and stigmatization against our fighting forces, which they accuse of violating human rights without having the slightest proof to produce. That orchestrated propaganda is in fact aimed at demoralizing Burkinabé patriots and sabotaging their legitimate fight, because quite simply those practitioners of chaos have not yet understood the dynamics under way in the Sahel — that is to say, our desire to free ourselves from all guardianship and paternalism.
My country takes the opportunity offered by this rostrum to respectfully express its infinite gratitude to all those friendly countries and sincere partners that support its cause and accompany it in the consolidation of its radiant march towards inclusive economic and social development. I would therefore like to invite United Nations Member States to give no credence to all the media agitation, which clearly reflects, in essence, the distress of terrorists in disarray and their sponsors. I also reassure them of the professionalism and reputation of our Defence and Security Forces, demonstrated through their participation in peacekeeping operations, as often recognized here in the General Assembly. The systematic training and ongoing education of the Defence and Security Forces and the Volunteers for the Defence of the Homeland in international humanitarian law guarantee that professional rigour in terms of respect for human rights on a daily basis.
To the extent that there is unanimity on the need to combat international terrorism, my country is concerned about the support given by State entities to terrorists. Such sponsorships, which we have constantly denounced and which others have dismissed as mere figments of the imagination, were recently revealed to the world by a paradoxical attitude of Ukraine, a State Member of our Organization. Indeed, by unequivocally affirming its involvement in the terrorist attacks that caused the death of elements of the Malian Defence and Security Forces in Tinzawatene, Mali, in July, and by acknowledging its support for international terrorism, particularly in the Sahel, that country has opened a window on the terrorist activities that it is carrying out in the Sahel, like other States active in the shadows of treason. We reiterate our firm condemnation of such acts of aggression and apology for terrorism, which violate the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant international conventions.
Those particularly serious facts are indicative of the ambitions that have constantly marked the history of our continent, namely, its balkanization, the assassination of its leaders, interference in the domestic politics of African States and predation as the ultimate goal. The means to do so range from the manipulation of national elites and regional and subregional organizations to the perpetration of proxy wars, as is the case in the Sahel, where Ukraine and other countries finance and arm terrorists with impunity. That reading, whose relevance is reflected in the worrying proliferation of military bases in our subregion, also explains the possession by criminal gangs of sophisticated and latest-generation weapons.
Faced with this new type of terrorism, the stability and foundations of our States and our organization have been compromised. It is therefore urgent to take vigorous action. For their part, and regarding the case of the Ukrainian aggression, the countries of the Confederation of Sahel States referred it to the Security Council on 20 August. We are waiting for firm responses in that regard.
Faced with the security imperatives of the Sahel, Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger decided in all sovereignty, on 16 September 2023, to create the Alliance of Sahel States (AES) through the Liptako-Gourma Charter. The AES is a military alliance for collective defence and mutual assistance to combat terrorism and organized crime on their territory. In order to also provide appropriate responses to the complex challenges of development, the AES countries have decided to extend the scope of their cooperation to other priority areas in their space.
It is in that spirit that the first Summit of Heads of State of the AES was held on 6 July in Niamey. At the end of that historic Summit, Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso and Head of State; Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali; and Brigadier General Abdourahmane Tiani, President of the Conseil national pour la sauvegarde de la patrie and Head of State of the Niger, adopted the treaty establishing the Confederation of Sahel States (AES). The popular support and enthusiasm generated by the advent of the AES Confederation can be explained in part by the failure and inability of subregional institutions and mechanisms to respond to the security and legitimate concerns of our populations. That salutary and beneficial action is aimed primarily at protecting the populations of the Sahel already tested by the security and humanitarian crisis and against whom deliberate murderous measures have been taken to further exacerbate their suffering.
While this session calls on us to leave no one behind, current international events are still, unfortunately, marked by increasingly acute tensions that seriously threaten peace and security, under the helpless gaze of the United Nations. Burkina Faso has always promoted diplomacy to resolve such disputes peacefully. We remain convinced that by prioritizing the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, we will succeed in extinguishing the hotbeds of tension, whatever their scale and wherever they occur — in Africa, Europe, the Middle East, Asia or America.
In that spirit — in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations — Burkina Faso reiterates its support for the political process under way in Western Sahara, conducted under the auspices of the Secretary-General with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable and negotiated political solution, as recommended by the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
In the Middle East, Burkina Faso reaffirms its solidarity with the Palestinian people, who are enduring an unprecedented tragedy. The two-State solution of Israel and Palestine living in peace and good-neighbourliness remains the objective option that Burkina Faso continues to support. Our acceptance of Palestine as a State Member of the United Nations is part of that logic.
As sources of untold suffering for the most vulnerable populations, unilateral coercive measures imposed on States must be prohibited if we want to give real and objective content to the topic of this session. This is why we call for the immediate lifting of economic, commercial and financial sanctions imposed on certain States whose only fault is the search for freedom for their peoples. That is the case with Cuba. It is also the case with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicaragua, Iran and many other countries.
On the subject of development issues, Burkina Faso would like to point out that, whatever their relevance, the commitments in favour of development made here at the United Nations will have no chance of success without the good faith and involvement of all.
With regard to the reform of our Organization, it is time for the African continent to be able to participate fully in the Security Council, in accordance with the Common African Position reflected in the consensus documents supporting it. That will make it possible to enshrine the universal nature of the United Nations and to redress the persistent injustice against Africa.
To conclude, I would like to point out that Burkina Faso has faith in the United Nations. However, it hopes that the Organization’s interventions will be carried out with respect for the sovereignty of Member States, their strategic choices and their fundamental interests. In the Sahel, a wind of renewal and hope is blowing, sparked by the advent of the AES Confederation. Burkina Faso remains convinced that this new subregional integration community, which is not directed against any country or people, can contribute, in collaboration with sincere partners, to an approach stripped of all hypocrisy, to the fight against terrorism and insecurity in the Sahel. God bless Burkina Faso. God bless the Confederation of Sahel States. God bless Africa. Give me my country or give me death — we shall prevail!
