I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly. I assure him of the Bangladesh delegation’s full cooperation throughout the session.
I also place on record our deep appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres for his unwavering commitment to delivering on the United Nations mandates and address the global challenges. I particularly applaud his vision in convening the Summit of the Future. The Pact for the Future and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1) could help in setting pathways beyond the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Bangladesh believes that the Summit’s outcome will serve as a guiding framework for materializing our shared aspirations and rethinking collaboration for posterity.
I stand in this parliament of nations thanks to an epochal transformation that Bangladesh witnessed in July and August. The power of the ordinary people, in particular our young people, presented our nation with an opportunity to overhaul many of our systems and institutions. The uprising, led by students and young people, was initially aimed at ending discrimination, but the movement gradually evolved into a people’s movement. The world eventually saw how people at large stood against autocracy, oppression, discrimination, injustice and corruption, both on the streets and online. With their exceptional resolve and capabilities, our people, particularly the young, won our independence from an autocratic and undemocratic regime. That collective resolve should define the Bangladesh of the future and place our nation as a responsible State in the comity of nations.
It was indeed a movement that primarily brought together people who had long been left behind by politics and development but who asked that prosperity be shared and inclusive. The people aspired to a just, inclusive and functioning democracy, for which our new generations made the supreme sacrifice. We were moved by the wisdom, courage and conviction demonstrated by our young people, who even braved the bullets with their chests bared. Young girls were fiercely vocal against the illegitimate State power. School-going teenagers laid down their lives. Hundreds lost their eyes, forever. Mothers, day labourers and scores of people across the cities lent their strength for the sake of their children. Defying sweat, rain and fear of death, they defeated all the evil designs and machinations of the few who had manipulated the State machinery against truth and the just aspirations of people for years. The people’s movement lost an estimated 800 martyrs or more at the hands of the autocratic regime.
Bangladesh was born because of its people’s profound belief in liberalism, pluralism and secularism. Decades later, our Generation Z is making us revisit and reimagine the very values that our people stood for back in 1971, as they also did in 1952 to defend our mother language, Bangla.] We believe that the revolution that the world witnessed in Bangladesh in the span of few weeks may inspire many across communities and countries to stand for freedom and justice. I call on the international community to re-engage with the new Bangladesh, which seeks to realize freedom and democracy, beyond mere words, for everyone.
Our youth and people together have entrusted me and my colleagues in the interim Government with enormous responsibilities to reconstruct a decaying State apparatus. As we took office, we discovered to our utter shock and dismay how endemic corruption had turned a functioning democracy into a farce, how key institutions had been ruthlessly politicized, how public coffers had been reduced to rubble, how oligarchs had taken over business, how a chosen few had concentrated wealth in their hands and amassed and laundered wealth out of Bangladesh. In all, justice, ethics and morality had sunk to a dire low at almost every level.
In such circumstances, we were asked to rebuild Bangladesh, recreate the country our people aspired to see, correct the ills of the past and build a competitive and agile economy and a just society. In a drastically changed scenario, all political parties are now free to voice their views and opinions. A key priority for us is also to make everyone in public positions and institutions accountable for their decisions and actions. We are committed to promoting and protecting the fundamental rights of people to speak in freedom, to assemble without fear or inhibition and to elect whomsoever they choose. That is what the nation wants and what we aim to achieve. We are also committed to upholding the independence of the judiciary and freedom of the press, including in the cyberdomain. In order to ensure that the child of a farmer or worker can climb to the highest rungs in society, we prioritize the allocation of funds to the education and health sectors over grandiose infrastructure development. We also seek to ensure good governance across all sectors.
I wish to assure Members that our Government shall adhere to all international, regional and bilateral instruments to which Bangladesh is party. Bangladesh will remain an active proponent of multilateralism, with the United Nations at the core. Bangladesh is open to nurturing friendly relations with all countries based on mutual respect, upholding our dignity, pride and shared interests.
In the past seven weeks, the Government has initiated several actions. At our request, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has dispatched a fact-finding mission to investigate the gross human rights violations committed during the people’s movement and to suggest sustainable course corrections. That mission has already started its work on the ground in Bangladesh. I wish to register my deep appreciation to High Commissioner Volker Türk. We acceded to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance within two weeks in office. The required national legislation is under way to enable its early implementation. A commission of inquiry has started investigating all cases of enforced disappearances reported during the past decade and a half.
In order to restore people’s trust and confidence and to ensure that the tragic past never recurs in a future Bangladesh, we have initiated reforms in certain prioritized sectors. In that regard, we have launched independent commissions to reform the electoral system, the Constitution, the judicial system, the civil administration and the law and order sectors. A few more commissions are in the works to reform other sectors, including the press and media. In order to create an environment conducive to business, we have rolled out extensive reforms in the banking and financial sectors. We are committed to not allowing any foreign business interest to be affected.
Beyond rhetoric and statistics, we aim to establish effective safeguard mechanisms to ensure the sustainability of those reforms and create an enabling environment towards the conduct of free, fair and participatory elections. I therefore call on the international community to pursue and deepen engagements with Bangladesh towards meeting our people’s quest for democracy, the rule of law, equality and prosperity so that we can emerge as a just and inclusive democratic society.
Bangladesh believes that maintaining peace and addressing conflicts is central to peoples’ progress. During the recent revolution, our valiant armed forces once again demonstrated their commitment to peace by standing firmly with the people in fulfilling their aspirations for freedom during a most difficult time in our history. That was possible thanks to our commitment to placing human rights at the core of peacekeeping. Bangladesh has also been committed to peacebuilding since the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission. We look forward to promoting and enhancing Bangladesh’s value-driven contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations. As the third-largest troop contributing country, our peacekeepers have served across 63 missions in 43 countries to date. A total of 168 Bangladeshi peacekeepers have laid down their lives, from Bosnia to Congo. We hope that the Bangladesh defence forces will continue to be called upon in future United Nations peace operations, regardless of the challenges or circumstances.
In our shared world, many global priorities need to be set right. Climate change poses existential threats to us all. The record-breaking heat wave this summer starkly reminded the world of climate-induced changes. What we need is climate justice to ensure that those who make irresponsible choices, act negligently or cause harm are held accountable. Long-term damages leave irreparable harm all around the world. We are losing biodiversity, while changing pathogens lead to newer diseases. Farming is under stress, shrinking water wealth threatens habitats and rising sea level and salinity are decimating ecosystems. The damage caused by the rising intensity and frequency of cyclones and floods can hardly be ignored. Those climate risks are felt far more deeply by our small farmers and artisanal workers. As I speak, over 5 million people are enduring the most devastating flooding in living memory in eastern Bangladesh.
Yet, Secretary-General Guterres has shown that at the current trajectory, the world is heading for a +2.7°C scenario. I would therefore urge the allocation of robust resources to climate adaptation in climate-vulnerable countries like Bangladesh. It is further crucial to operationalize the Loss and Damage Fund by leveraging innovative solutions and additional financing. We also need access to technologies and increased capacity. To be specific, we need access to live-saving technologies, particularly in agriculture, water and public health, where a trickle of modest solutions or innovations can save millions of vulnerable people.
Tackling the climate crisis has to go hand-in-hand with getting the global economy in order as well. The world is increasingly focused on decarbonization. In order for such a shift to be beneficial to the majority of the global population, the transformative vision of a net-zero world has to come through for countries like Bangladesh as well. Failing that, we risk falling short on our pledge to ensure shared prosperity through shared responsibility.
I believe that the world needs to engage in a shared vision of three zeroes that we can materialize together, targeting zero poverty, zero unemployment and zero net carbon emissions. It must be a world where a young person anywhere on the planet will have opportunities to grow not as a job-seeker but as an entrepreneur; where a young person can unleash his or her latent creativity despite all limitations; where an entrepreneur can optimally balance social benefits, economic profits and responsibility towards nature; and where social business can help an individual rise beyond consumerism and ultimately catalyse social and economic transformation.
Time demands new attitudes, new values and new compacts across communities and countries, across developed and developing countries alike, and across all actors and stakeholders. If we are to realize such a course correction in full, the United Nations, national and local Governments, non-governmental organizations, businesses and philanthropies have to walk together. If we accept and accommodate social business within existing economic structures, we can bring meaningful changes to the lives of the bottom half of our populations. If we can realistically position social business, we can suppress much of the climate-insensitive distortions within the existing market economy. I invite the attention of Secretary-General António Guterres in that regard.
In a world of polycrises, wars and conflicts are leading to the erosion of rights and widespread abuses. The genocide in Gaza continues unabated despite global concerns and condemnation. The situation in Palestine concerns not just Arabs and Muslims but all humankind. Palestinians are not expendable. All those responsible for committing crimes against humanity against the Palestinian people must be held accountable. Bangladesh calls for an immediate and complete ceasefire to protect the Palestinian people from such brutalities, particularly those targeting children and women. The international community, including the United Nations, needs to act in earnest to implement the two-State solution, which remains the only path to lasting peace in the Middle East.
The two-and-a-half-year war in Ukraine has claimed far too many lives. The war has had impacts far and wide, including deeper economic implications for Bangladesh. We urge both sides to pursue dialogue to resolve the differences and end the war.
For the past seven years, Bangladesh has been hosting over 1.2 million Rohingyas on humanitarian grounds, incurring significant social, economic and environmental costs. The protracted crisis in Myanmar also poses a growing threat, with national and regional security implications for Bangladesh through traditional and non-traditional security challenges alike. We remain committed to supporting the forcibly displaced Rohingyas from Myanmar in Bangladesh. We need the continued support of the international community for the Rohingyas in carrying out humanitarian operations and their sustainable repatriation. Equally important is to ensure justice for the grave human rights violations committed against the Rohingyas through the ongoing accountability processes in the International Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court.
We recognize and appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations system in creating an environment conducive to allowing the Rohingyas to lead a free and dignified life. That requires creating pathways for the Rohingyas to return to their ancestral home in Rakhine state with safety and rights. Looking at the evolving situation on the ground in Myanmar, Bangladesh is ready to work with the international community to create an environment for the dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingyas to their homeland.
Peace and security cannot be ensured without political freedom and the socioeconomic emancipation of the people. Around a decade back, the world unanimously adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We reposed our collective hopes and trust in that universal set of Goals. Yet merely 17 per cent of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) targets are on track to be achieved by 2030. Clearly, many developing countries risk being left behind.
Every year, developing countries face a significant SDG financing gap, estimated at between $2.5 trillion and $4 trillion. High debt burdens, shrinking fiscal space and the adverse impacts of climate change put countries like Bangladesh at greater risk. We look forward to seeing the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development deliver on addressing the complex and systemic challenges. The multilateral financing institutions have to be driven by a vision in which wealth and opportunities can be accessed by all and that rightfully places social business within respective programmes, duly addresses the circumstances in the low-income countries, promotes entrepreneurship, encourages creativity of individuals and supports the dispossessed. In that regard, the prevention of illicit financial flows and the siphoning of resources from the developing countries merit greater attention. Increased international cooperation must rechannel the assets stolen from the developing countries. We look forward to the early conclusion of an international tax convention that can combat tax evasion.
Migration and mobility are an inescapable reality in an interconnected world. As a country of migrant origin, over 11 million of our people live and work worldwide. In order for migration to be beneficial for all, we have to create pathways for safe, orderly, regular and responsible migration and mobility. The international community has to ensure full respect for human rights and the humane treatment of migrants, regardless of their migration status. While Bangladesh remains committed to the full implementation of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, our Government is also committed to curbing unsafe migration.
Every year, nearly 2.5 million Bangladeshis enter our labour market. With a large population in which nearly two-thirds are young people, Bangladesh is challenged in making education suited to meet the needs of today and tomorrow. Yet, we see how the world of work is changing in such a way that a younger person has to adapt constantly, develop new skills and adopt new attitudes. As Bangladesh prepares to graduate as a middle-income country, we recognize the vital need to secure our path in terms of learning and technology.
We are particularly enthused by emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) tools and applications. Our young people are excited about the prospect of fast-unfolding generative AI. They aspire to walk and work as global citizens. The world needs to ensure that no young people in countries like Bangladesh are left behind in reaping meaningful benefits from the AI-led transformation. At the same time, the world needs to ensure that the development of artificial intelligence does not diminish the scope of or demand for human labour.
As the scientific community and the world of technology keep moving in developing autonomous intelligence — artificial intelligence that propagates on its own without any human intervention — we all need to be cautious of the possible impact on every human person or our societies, today and beyond. We believe that unless autonomous intelligence develops in a responsible manner, it could pose existential threats to human existence. We need newer forms of collaboration where global business and knowledge-holders connect to people’s needs. International cooperation should create space for the developing countries in ways that can bring transformative applications or solutions for jobs, endemic socioeconomic challenges or livelihoods.
Uniting our efforts, capacities and resources is increasingly crucial for us to leverage collective strengths, innovate and foster growth. The challenges we face in economic development, climate resilience or social development have to be addressed with common endeavours. In that context, South-South and triangular cooperation can help us, given our unique social and economic circumstances. It is also a growing necessity for the global South to make our voices heard. In shaping and steering the global agenda, the global South merits equal space and focus.
The coronavirus disease pandemic underlined the crucial importance of investing in public health. At the World Health Organization, as Bangladesh leads the negotiations on a global pandemic treaty, we advocate convergence on the key provisions of adequate international cooperation, the financing of public health systems, technology transfer, research and development, and the diversification of the production of medical diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics. We must also declare vaccines a global public good that is free from the rigours of intellectual property law. Those measures are also crucial in combatting the scourge of non-communicable diseases.
This year, we celebrate the golden jubilee of Bangladesh’s partnership with the United Nations. It has been a shared journey of mutual learning. In its modest way, Bangladesh has contributed to promoting global peace and security, justice, equality, human rights, social progress and prosperity and, indeed, to building a rules-based international order. For instance, I recall the Assembly’s resolutions on microcredit and the Friends of Microcredit group that was formed with great spontaneity in the General Assembly in 1999. The United Nations declared 2005 the International Year of Microcredit, extending the global reach of microcredit. The General Assembly’s resolution on a culture of peace, adopted annually since 2001, and Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on the women and peace and security agenda, may be worth recalling as well.
As the Assembly Hall reverberates with calls for peace, security, justice, inclusivity and the equitable distribution of wealth, we, as States, need to reflect on how we embolden men and women today and create space for them to grow as the entrepreneurs of tomorrow. The world has more than enough capacity, resources and solutions. Let us redeem all the pledges we have made nationally and internationally. Let us work together to end all forms of inequality and discrimination within and among nations, especially in advancing the proposition of social business in our economic interactions.
The young people of Bangladesh have showed that upholding freedom, dignity and the rights of people, regardless of their distinction and status, cannot remain a mere aspiration. It is simply what everyone deserves. In this assembly of nations, Bangladesh assure members that we will continue to play our part at the international, regional and national levels in securing peace, prosperity and justice for everyone.
