Allow me at the outset to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I believe that, under his leadership and through his vision, the international community will move forward on the agenda of strengthening the values of the Charter of the United Nations — an effort that humankind needs more than ever.
Our world faces a range of complex problems — from unprecedented challenges to global peace and security to the escalating climate crisis and persistent inequalities. We are confronted with a complex array of issues that require our immediate attention and concerted effort. We need to light a spark that ignites change. With that in mind, my country is looking forward to the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly with renewed determination to promote multilateral and workable solutions achieved through negotiations and based on the Charter. We must follow that path for the sake of the survival of humankind and future generations.
Taking that into consideration, we praise the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) as a move towards a vital transformation. It becomes increasingly clear that our success hinges on a firm commitment to upholding multilateralism and respect for international law, which are the cornerstones of our global order. That order, which has been forged at the United Nations by the representatives here and their predecessors, is now under severe threat. Bulgaria has always been committed to the values of multilateralism and will remain so, using our accumulated experience from the successful Bulgarian presidency of the Economic and Social Council and our current mandate as a constructive member of the Human Rights Council.
In 2015, all United Nations Member States unanimously adopted 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), providing a shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for the entire planet. Today the Goals remain more topical than ever and require a full mobilization of international efforts. However, we must admit that the sheer deterioration of the international peace and security environment in recent years is threatening the fulfilment of our 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, undermining the rules-based international order. Restoring and preserving peace must be seen as the ultimate goal of the international community and is a basic prerequisite for the fulfilment of the SDGs.
It has been two and a half years since the Russian Federation unleashed a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. From the very beginning, Bulgaria has strongly condemned the war, which has led to hundreds of thousands of victims, enormous suffering and destruction. Every single day of the war increases the risk of escalation in intensity and geographical scope, posing a substantial threat to global peace and security. The side effects of the war are already gravely affecting the economies and social systems of many countries worldwide. That is why the international community should seek paths that lead to de-escalation and dialogue. We should support every diplomatic effort that pursues comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Since last year’s general debate, we have witnessed a significant increase in instability across the Middle East. The conflict between Israel and Hamas, after the latter’s brutal attack on Israel, triggered a major deterioration of the security situation in the region, with global projections. We must not forget the consequences that followed: tens of thousands dead or injured civilians in Gaza, the total destruction of vital infrastructure and the mass displacement of people. We call for an immediate ceasefire and free access for humanitarian convoys, as well as the release of all hostages held by Hamas. We are also deeply concerned about recent developments in Lebanon, bringing a qualitative new and dangerous dimension to the conflict and increasing the risk of its regional enlargement. We call on the parties to refrain from the use of force, turn to wisdom and seek de-escalation. The spiral of violence and the human suffering must come to an end. The only way to achieve sustainable and lasting peace in the region, with its very fragile security landscape, is the two-State solution.
Amid the ongoing destabilization across different regions, the collective goal for a world without nuclear threats remains more critical than ever. In line with the New Agenda for Peace, Bulgaria will maintain its commitment to uphold, protect and strengthen the multilateral framework for disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. We remain dedicated to the universalization and full implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which we recognize as the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. It serves as the essential foundation for pursuing nuclear disarmament and plays a crucial role in the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
As we address those challenges, prioritizing regional stability becomes vital. My country is actively engaged in political dialogue with South-East European countries, driven by the conviction that the region’s security, stability and prosperity are crucial for broader regional and international resilience. Bulgaria is a strong supporter of the European path of the Western Balkan countries. Our main priorities vis-à-vis the region are fostering good neighbourliness, improving connectivity, protecting human rights and combating ethnic discrimination. However, a serious challenge along that path is posed by new outbursts of incitements of hatred. Fighting and curbing the aggressive nationalistic rhetoric all over the region and concentrating on a positive agenda of strengthening multi-ethnic societies and the rights of the constituent communities will prevent an evocation of the region’s troubled past.
Progress in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals is the greatest investment for the benefit of current and future generations. Bulgaria continues to contribute actively to those common efforts through the steady implementation of its national development programme towards 2030 and of sustainable projects for development cooperation with partner countries. We are supporting projects in the fields of education, healthcare and public infrastructure and services, as well as renewable energy solutions.
In a growing number of places around the world, we face the emergence of worrisome dynamics in terms of governance, democracy and human rights. As a current member of the Human Rights Council, we reaffirm our commitment to that noble cause. Bulgaria has never looked the other way, and that is demonstrated through our domestic policies; our membership of the Human Rights Council; our work as a co-Chair of the Group of Friends for Children and Sustainable Development Goals, as Vice-President of the UNICEF Bureau, as a member of the Executive Board of UN-Women; and our support for initiatives that empower the General Assembly and are aimed at ensuring accountability. Our advocacy for the meaningful participation of civil society, youth and women in decision-making processes — both across the United Nations system and domestically — have already yielded results, and our youth delegate programme inspires more young people to choose the path of active citizenship. Bulgaria advocates for a human rights-based approach to sustainable development and looks forward to the inclusion of all stakeholders at the upcoming second World Summit for Social Development.
We have focused on peace among nations, but it is equally important to reconcile with nature. Climate change is a threat multiplier for the implementation of all Sustainable Development Goals. We call for enhanced action based on the first global stocktaking of the Paris Agreement and for more ambitious climate objectives, including the new finance goal agreed at the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Earlier this year, Bulgaria hosted the sixty-first session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which gave impetus to the Panel’s seventh assessment cycle, including the production of the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities. Through various Panel events, we were able to invigorate a science-based discussion, paying due attention to the climate risks in the Black Sea region, as well as to the urban environment, the role of cities and the need to adapt to a changing climate.
Another challenge that also brings a lot of opportunities is the need for effective digital governance, based on a multi-stakeholder and inclusive approach and aimed at a human-centric digital transformation and a safe and open digital future.
In the light of growing challenges to the principles of international law and the rules-based order established by the Charter, Bulgaria remains committed to strengthening the effectiveness and accountability of the Security Council. We support efforts to enhance transparency and accountability within that body, having co-sponsored the key General Assembly resolution on veto use (resolution 76/262). Bulgaria emphasizes the need for greater effectiveness and prioritizes securing an additional non-permanent seat for the Group of Eastern European States in a reformed Council.
Let us reaffirm our commitment to addressing these global challenges with firmness and determination. The action we take today will define the future, and with courage and unity, we will rise to meet the opportunities that lie ahead.
