It is a special honour for me to address the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session as the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Allow me to wish the President of the General Assembly every success in the complex and challenging times of today. I also congratulate former President Mr. Dennis Francis for successfully presiding over the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session .
It is a great honour to serve the invincible State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, one of the oldest countries of Europe. We are proud that Bosnia has been mentioned in historical sources for 1,075 years now. For centuries, my country has demonstrated resilience, courage and the strength of unity in diversity. Bosnia and Herzegovina was not created in Dayton in 1995; rather, the Dayton Peace Agreement confirmed the continuity of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those are unquestionable historical and legal facts.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made great progress since the end of the war in 1995. We have rebuilt the country destroyed by the war. We united the defence system, the judiciary, the tax system and numerous other institutions. Today, Bosnia and Herzegovina is at the doorstep of the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Bosnia and Herzegovina is actively working to become a NATO and EU member. Those are our strategic foreign policy goals, which have been unanimously defined by the State authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The entire world is facing numerous challenges and threats. Unfortunately, we live in a world of injustice, insecurity and intolerance. Never in history has a human had more power and at the same time felt as insecure as she or he does today. In the past two years, we have faced new difficult challenges, especially security-related ones. The strengthening of authoritarian populism, the aggression against Ukraine and the suffering of Gaza have plunged humankind into a deep crisis full of uncertainty and fear.
The world is seriously threatened by poverty, disease, natural disasters, wars and injustice. It is estimated that one person dies of hunger every four seconds. The fact that millions of children in the world live in extreme poverty is particularly sad. A reasonable question arises: Why have we allowed an incomparably greater investment in weapons than in eradicating poverty? It is time for everyone to realize that human lives are more important than guns. If we do not, I fear that we are collectively headed for a global catastrophe.
Regarding climate change, Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully aware of the global situation and is determined to contribute to global efforts. We are committed to the transition to renewable energy sources and the reduction of harmful gas emissions.
Terrorism is a serious threat. Countering that threat requires joint and dedicated efforts. The world must reach a consensus on the fight against terrorism. Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to show a determined commitment to the fight against terrorism.
We cannot solve the problems of modern humankind without addressing their causes. The course of history is not something we can stop. However, we can influence its flow. Therefore, I suggest that we now focus on preserving the role of the United Nations as the global centre of coordination and cooperation; reaffirming the importance of the Charter of the United Nations; strengthening the multilateral system in accordance with international law; intensifying the United Nations reform process; common work to strengthen the credibility of the United Nations; the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals; rebuilding trust and cooperation among nations on key global issues; giving a chance to mutual trust, inclusiveness and a democratic vision of leadership; and strengthening preventive diplomacy in times of geopolitical fragmentation in the world. Together we should open a space for creative global cooperation instead of the geopolitics of rivalry and conflict in the twenty-first century. Conflicts and destruction are not at our civilization’s core. We should be building a culture of dialogue, cooperation and peace. Peace and stability have no alternative.
Humankind is once again facing a severe moral and political crisis. The United Nations response to Ukraine and Gaza has been as inadequate as it was during the aggression in Bosnia and Herzegovina from 1992 to 1995. The Russian aggression against Ukraine is a flagrant example of the violation of the United Nations Charter and international law. That is why we reiterate our firm condemnation of Russian aggression and our support for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The suffering and hardship of Palestinian children and civilians are terrifying. Gaza represents the heavy defeat of collective humanity in the twenty-first century. All human lives are equally valuable. Civilized people must fight for the human rights of all, regardless of their racial, religious, ethnic or other affiliation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only European country where genocide has been committed since the Second World War. That has been ruled on by the highest courts of the United Nations. The judgments on genocide committed against Bosniaks have legal, historical, civilizational and moral significance.
Unfortunately, the ideology, politics and media that fostered the genocide are once again threatening Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would like to especially thank the General Assembly for adopting resolution 78/282 on 23 May, designating 11 July as the International Day of Reflection and Commemoration of the 1995 Genocide in Srebrenica. The resolution is a highly moral and civilized act and is just as important for the United Nations as it is for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let us preserve the truth about the genocides in Srebrenica and Rwanda for the sake of the past, present and, most importantly, the future.
Despite all the injustices, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains firmly committed to regional cooperation, as that is one of our main strategic foreign policy goals. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a peaceful country, committed to strengthening regional cooperation. That is why we actively participate in numerous regional initiatives. For the peaceful future of the Western Balkans, it is crucial that all countries acknowledge that there are to be no changes of State borders. Those who try to do differently risk a dangerous destabilization of the region, with unforeseeable consequences.
Here, at the rostrum of the General Assembly, I want to publicly warn the global audience that, once again, the leadership of the Republic of Serbia is threatening the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The greater-State aspirations of Serbia towards the territories of other countries in the region are the essential reason why Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkans are exposed to new dangers.
Evidence of that is the destructive Declaration issued by the so-called All-Serb Assembly, adopted in Belgrade on 8 June. It is not just a declarative act, but a dangerous greater-State programme document that threatens the Dayton Peace Agreement and the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The content of the Declaration directly contradicts the democratic and civilized world’s established procedures, international and national law, the fundamental principles of the European Union and the principles that are the foundation of relations among United Nations Members. The Declaration is a threat to regional peace and to the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, as Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I want to emphasize that I am proud of my heroic and dignified homeland, Bosnia and Herzegovina. My country achieved a civilizational and moral victory in the previous decades, despite the genocide, the crimes against humanity and the activities of joint criminal enterprises. People in my country want peace and cooperation. We stand for humanity and solidarity. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a global story of hope, courage and unity. We will protect Bosnia and Herzegovina and its unity in diversity. In that way, we also contribute to global unity.
