For 79 years now, our countries have been meeting in this Hall to speak their own truth, exchange best practices and support important initiatives, all under the motto of making the world a better place.
But is the world really becoming better, more predictable, safer or more stable? There are old-timers among us who may remember the time when the United Nations played a special role in that regard. Unfortunately, we less seasoned participants know it only from textbooks. Many years ago, the Charter of the United Nations was unshakable, a true guarantor of compromise and forward-looking solutions. Many still recalled the victims and horrors of the Second World War and no one wanted a repeat of that terrible tragedy. Therefore, together we formed a unique instrument for collective dispute resolution and strengthening the architecture of international cooperation.
Yes, as history has shown, the instrument is not perfect in everything, just as we are not, but it is undoubtedly the best the world has had and has. Not all issues, even those with clear outcomes, have been successfully addressed and blood continues to flow as a result. A good example of that is Palestine, where a true humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding, and tens of thousands of civilians are dying.
But that does not diminish the achievements of the past century. The colonial system was destroyed. Many nations received the hard-won right to independent development. Hubs of economic, industrial and financial growth appeared on all continents. Entire regions began to emerge from the shadow of hunger and epidemics. United Nations peacekeeping activities were able to prevent or help end bloody conflicts. The United Nations blue was seen everywhere where problems were successfully solved for the purposes of development.
But what is happening today? Why did we need to create the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations? Why are we forced today to defend a document that already has the highest legal force for everyone? Why can we not fully use the United Nations tools to restore order in the world?
The answer is obvious. It is because a number of countries do not live by the norms prescribed by the Charter and do not intend to because for them abiding by international law is akin to slow extinction. Of course, they refer to the Charter when they speak from this rostrum, but not in any universal sense; rather, they do so only insofar as it serves their own selfish interests and claims, often in relation to others. I recall that the law of the United Nations is universal and gives everyone without exception equal rights to development and equal non-discriminatory access to common goods, technologies and resources.
Is that approach acceptable to the West? It is clearly not. Its main interest is maintaining dominance on the planet and ensuring the well-being of its elites. To that end, entire nations and foreign resources are exploited and the development of the rest of the world is constrained. The age-old principle of divide-and-conquer is applied everywhere and in fact forms the basis of all modern military conflicts. All United Nations principles are relegated to the back shelf when it comes to the so-called vital interests of the United States and its satellites, but if a State dares to pursue a policy in the interests of its own people or tries to throw off the yoke of external control over its resources, the West suddenly recalls all the conventions, their provisions and even their most insignificant footnotes. Most importantly, the entire gamut of illegal sanctions and pressure is applied to anyone who disagrees. That is the nature of all so-called colour revolutions, which lead only to suffering and upheaval for ordinary people. It is the path of the West and its recipe for a new world — a recipe, by the way, that is generously seasoned with NATO weapons.
Let us take a look at that. Today, some 40 countries with a total population of 2.5 billion are under illegal, unilateral restrictive measures imposed by the United States and the European Union (EU). Many have been living in such conditions for decades, while freedom-loving Cuba has done so for more than half a century. That instrument grossly violates entire sections of international law and the United Nations Charter. It unlawfully hinders sustainable development, undermines food and energy security, restricts access to global markets and violates the right to freedom of movement. It also has a boomerang effect on ordinary people in the initiating countries. In our EU neighbours, we are seeing people complain about ever-increasing energy and food prices, as well as social upheaval.
What is the outcome of all this? From the point of view of the collective West — my information is taken from American sources — 72 per cent of the world’s population lives in so-called autocracies. Twenty years ago, that figure, according to their own estimates, was 46 per cent. So has the West’s policy of forcing the international community to live according to its own template been successful? The answer is obviously and clearly not.
In general, the trend is also obvious — the free countries of the global South do not accept the sanctions, interference in their internal affairs or so-called democratization foisted on them. They want to develop on the basis of their own historical traditions, their understanding of the world and in the interests of their peoples. Today they are the global majority, within which new, exclusively peaceful ideas and projects are emerging in the interests of the entire world community, and not against anyone. That includes the Chinese Belt and Road initiative and the Global Development Initiative, the Global Security Initiative and the Global Civilization Initiative put forward by the President of the People’s Republic of China, Mr. Xi Jinping. It also includes the Belarusian-Russian idea of the Eurasian Charter of Diversity and Multipolarity in the Twenty-First Century, the Indian Voice of the Global South initiative and many others.
To one degree or another, all of those projects are aimed at establishing an international community with a single destiny for the entire planet, and not just for the so-called golden billion. After all, we have one planet in all its diversity, which enriches us all. That is our path — the path of our President Alexandr Lukashenko and our people. It is based on respect, trust, sincerity, reliability and responsibility. Indeed, Belarus has responded to the latest package of illegal sanctions with openness and has unilaterally waived the visa regime for citizens of all EU countries. Thousands of EU citizens have already taken advantage of the waiver by visiting our country and have not been disappointed. They saw no dictators anywhere.
If we placed greater trust in the United Nations, most global peace initiatives would be born and developed within the Organization itself, not outside it, and the world would not be threatened with a new fragmentation into political and economic blocs.
Let me say a few, somewhat unusual words about the potential for conflict on the planet. We are all accustomed to third-rate works of fiction and brief, completely useless YouTube videos. We have grown accustomed to that simplistic way of receiving information, forcing us to forget the truths that many famous humanists and writers have written in the past. In that regard, I deliberately turn to three Western writers — one English and two American — to draw some parallels with modern events.
I shall quote first from the work Cabbage and Kings, written 100 years ago by the beloved O. Henry:
“The little opéra-bouffe nations play at government and intrigue until some day a big, silent gunboat glides into the offing and warns them not to break their toys.” That would be an American ship.
Next, I recall Graham Greene and his The Quiet American, written 70 years ago, in which an undercover CIA operative in the United States Embassy in Viet Nam seeks a third force in order to organize a coup in that country through a series of terrorist attacks and install forces loyal to America to power.
Last, I will mention Kurt Vonnegut’s A Man Without a Country, written roughly 50 years ago. Vonnegut could not understand why the United States of America and Great Britain needed to carpet bomb the city of Dresden at the very end of the Second World War, when the outcome of the war was already clear, burying more than 100,000 old people, children and women under the rubble. We know why they did it — to make them fear the future. That is very similar to what we are seeing today in many places in the world — meddling, provocations and real American warships, and not just one but many.
That is precisely why we need a strong and impartial universal international Organization capable of guaranteeing balance in the world, in which no country or bloc of countries will be able to exploit the United Nations instruments to satisfy its own selfish desires, to the detriment of the global majority. A strong Organization would not allow Ukraine to fight to the last Ukrainian to benefit transnational capital and in the interests of the collective West. If everyone understood, as neighbouring Belarus does, what is really happening in the conflict zone and what the real threat is, and genuinely wanted to stop the bloody confrontation between two fraternal peoples, then Ukraine would have long ago found itself alongside Russia, not on the battlefield but at the peace negotiating table. In that context, initiatives like the Brazil-China peace plan are very timely. However, no project will be successful without Russia’s participation. There can be no new security architecture in our region without the participation of Belarus.
In the meantime, NATO continues to multiply its military capabilities on our western borders, deploying tens of thousands of soldiers and thousands of pieces of equipment. We are seriously concerned that the game may spin out of control and lead to an escalation of the conflict on a regional or even global scale, with catastrophic consequences for everyone. There are enough nuclear weapons in Europe. Therefore, the escalation of tension is a direct path to a third world war.
Ten years ago, Minsk became the venue for effective negotiations to resolve the conflict in Ukraine. We are still offering our peacekeeping efforts because we know and understand Russians and Ukrainians better than anyone else. We will do everything in our power to achieve peace in long-suffering Ukraine. We have a greater interest in it than anyone.
By way of general information, more than 250,000 Ukrainians have crossed our EU border into Belarus since the beginning of the conflict. That figure has recently risen to 12,000 to 15,000 a month. Those are the official figures. People do not flee today’s prosperous Europe to the aggressor. By the way, that number is several times higher than the number of refugees crossing our border into the EU. The shameless expulsion of migrants into Belarus is another dirty page in the book of European democracy. On our border with the EU, the military of some EU countries have beaten and tortured thousands of refugees from Asia, Africa and the Middle East with impunity. Dozens have been killed, as confirmed by independent international sources, and many buried without identification.
The Council of Europe recently unequivocally condemned such actions and criticized a new Polish law that expands the scope of the legal use of firearms by Polish military personnel against refugees. That is how so-called enlightened Europe greets those who flee the horrors and upheavals that have resulted from the policies and interference of the collective West in the sovereign affairs of foreign countries. Such actions are a flagrant violation of the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. All facts have been recorded in detail and will soon be sent to the relevant international bodies, although those bodies should have dealt with that issue themselves long ago. We are therefore concerned about how we will forge the path to strengthening the foundations of the United Nations.
First, the United Nations must free itself from the dictates of individual States that do as they see fit and see themselves as exceptional. The United Nations is all of us. Secretariat staff must remember that, when they become United Nations employees, they work in the interests of the entire Organization and not to please the countries of their citizenship. They are therefore obliged to be objective, impartial and independent.
Secondly, the Organization must work to support regional processes, since regionalism is a key reality of today. We are seeing the continual strengthening of regional integration processes in various parts of the planet. The associations of the countries of the global majority are gaining momentum in their activities. Those include the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa group, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Eurasian Economic Union, the African Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and many others. I talked about the reason for that earlier. The United Nations needs to integrate itself into those processes, promoting their development and conjugation.
Thirdly, last year Western countries staged a dirty campaign to prevent the election of Belarus to the Security Council. They were very afraid of our honest voice in that organ. However, outside the Council we will speak out directly and openly on the entire spectrum of global problems. Moreover, we will continue to insist on a fair reform of the Security Council because the voice of the global majority countries on the Council is also our voice. We therefore believe that the urgent need of the day is to reform the Security Council by including major developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. Those countries are at the forefront of major global problems. They know better than anyone else how to resolve wars and conflicts in the developing world, and their weight in world affairs today is much greater than it was 80 years ago.
Fourthly, the United Nations must have a fundamental say on the unacceptability of unilateral measures. We have the right to expect serious and objective assessments from the Organization on the negative impact of sanctions on sustainable development processes that we all support. Moreover, we believe it necessary to establish the work of the United Nations to counteract illegal sanctions on a systemic footing. All such cases should be given a fundamental objective assessment.
Fifthly, we must use the United Nations as a platform for effectively addressing ever-growing transnational threats. Belarus has always been committed to a collective approach to solving such common global problems as migration, pandemics, natural disasters, human trafficking, hunger and many others.
Outside the walls of this Hall there is a counter that is recording in real time the money spent on weapons. It amounts to trillions of dollars, and that is only the money the United Nations knows about. Let the countries of the so-called golden billion use those trillions not to unleash and fuel more wars and conflicts, but to resolve issues vital to humanity. Many global problems would thereby be solved immediately. The United Nations would receive the resources that are necessary for development and are persistently insufficient, while donors claim they have no money, and the world would finally see the desire of the self-styled hegemons to be responsible for solving and not creating global problems. Furthermore, the United Nations should be the voice of the States, undiluted by that of various non-State structures. After all, it is the Member States that take decisions in the Organization that affect the fate of all people on the planet and are fully responsible for their implementation.
This year is very significant for the Republic of Belarus. We recently celebrated the eightieth anniversary of our liberation from the fascist invaders. That date marked the start of a new chapter in our country’s history — one that is peaceful and creative. We are proud to have created a socially oriented State where caring for people is the most important priority of national policy.
Next year, we will all celebrate the eightieth anniversary of the creation of the United Nations. How will the world approach that important milestone? Will it be entangled in quarrels and conflicts? That is why the President of Belarus Alexandr Lukashenko has put forward the initiative to hold a global dialogue on security that closely dovetails with other proposals made today and yesterday by many representatives from this rostrum. We will continue to knock on the doors of peace, constructive action, security and development.
Last year, we began holding an international conference on Eurasian security in Minsk with a view to consolidating political, economic and other processes in greater Eurasia, to the benefit of our States and peoples. This year, it will be held on 31 October. We invite everyone to attend. We must once again fill the lungs of the United Nations with the spirit of San Francisco that gave life to our Organization. We are convinced that this is vitally necessary today. It is necessary in the interests of all people on the planet.
