It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly. I greet the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Philemon Yang, our brother Secretary-General António Guterres and all delegations present.
Today, we meet at a challenging time for humankind, facing not one but multiple crises that threaten our present and the future of coming generations, from climate change to inequalities, pandemics, geopolitical conflicts and the crisis of democracies. Those crises feed off each other, deepening vulnerabilities and posing challenges that require urgent, coordinated and collective responses.
Today’s global economy is exacerbating inequalities and the model of capital accumulation, based on the concentration of wealth in the hands of a few, has increased poverty, marginalization and social instability in many parts of the world, while financial markets continue to generate huge profits for the 1 per cent of the global elite and millions of people struggle to access the most basic resources. The crisis is not only economic; it is also an ethical and social crisis that reveals the deep structural flaws of the capitalist system that prioritizes profit over life, well-being and Mother Earth.
Wars, arms production, immense military spending and the proliferation of weapons not only divert enormous resources that could be allocated to sustainable development, but also fuel conflicts that aggravate human suffering. Billions of dollars are spent on arms production while millions of people lack access to basic services such as education, health care, food and water. Instead of providing solutions to common problems, global instability increases and hinders the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The environmental crisis is one of the greatest threats and our actions to address it remain insufficient. Global warming, deforestation, pollution and biodiversity loss are devastating our ecosystems, but they also have a direct impact on the lives of millions of people through such extreme phenomena as increasingly intense droughts, floods and hurricanes, which affect local communities and indigenous peoples.
Unprecedented technological transformations, through the development of new technologies and artificial intelligence, are advances that are redefining the way we interact, work and face our daily lives. However, that technological revolution also raises profound questions about the role of global governance in a world where technological power is concentrated in the hands of a few corporations and nations. Global governance must adapt to ensure that those technologies are used equitably, ethically and in the service of the well-being of humankind, rather than deepening inequalities or generating new forms of exclusion and control.
In the face of those crises, we must act decisively to collectively confront global challenges. It is time to rethink our development models and strengthen multilateral institutions, to protect the planet for future generations and to ensure that justice, equity and solidarity are the principles that guide our actions, with respect for international law and the Charter of the United Nations. The system that has governed the world order since the end of the Second World War has proven insufficient to address contemporary crises, such as climate change, inequalities, regional conflicts, pandemics and new forms of economic interdependence. Therefore, a new world order based on effective multilateral cooperation, respect for the sovereignty of all countries and equity in global decision-making is imperative.
To that end, a profound restructuring of international institutions, such as the Security Council, is necessary to make it more democratic and representative. We must move towards a system in which global decisions are made in an inclusive manner, respecting the diversity of visions and the needs of developing countries. In that regard, a profound restructuring of the international financial architecture is also necessary, focusing on economic justice, sustainability and inclusion, creating fairer mechanisms for the restructuring of sovereign debt, increasing the participation of developing countries in financial institutions and promoting financing flows that support sustainable development and climate action. It is also essential to redesign the mechanisms of international fiscal cooperation to ensure that the most vulnerable economies have access to resources that allow them to face the multiple crises. The restructuring of the international financial system is not only a technical issue, but also an ethical and political requirement to build a more equitable, resilient and supportive global economy.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals remain in force and represent a fundamental road map for tackling the most urgent global challenges. They provide us with a clear framework for action and international cooperation, despite the delay in their implementation. We must redouble our efforts and strengthen the collective commitment to ensuring that this ambitious plan becomes a tangible reality and changes the lives of our people.
The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) must constitute a historic opportunity to rethink our course as the human species, committing us to an agenda that not only addresses immediate problems but also promotes sustainable, inclusive and equitable solutions for future generations. The Pact for the Future must not end in a diplomatic meeting. It is now our turn to take the decisions and agreements to give impetus to the Sustainable Development Goals and change life in every community and city. Sustainable development and climate change represent two sides of the same challenge that will determine the future of our planet and the generations to come. Acting means not only reducing emissions; it also means transforming our production and consumption models, protecting biodiversity and ensuring economic progress without leaving anyone behind.
Bolivia recognizes the international community as a space for solidarity and cooperation, under the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. In that context, we reject unilateral coercive measures that violate the most basic human rights and delay the development of many peoples. We express our solidarity with Cuba, Venezuela, Nicaragua and all countries throughout the world that suffer unjustly from such unilateral sanctions.
We also express our emphatic rejection of the economic, financial and commercial blockade by the United States against the brotherly people of Cuba. Sixty years of injustice have not been enough to punish a people that has bravely faced the attempts of submission and domination of the imperial Power. We are sure that, sooner rather than later, justice and truth will triumph. That injustice was compounded by the United States unilateral inclusion of Cuba on the list of countries sponsoring terrorism. Cuba should lead the list of the most supportive countries in the world, since its helping hand has reached every corner of the planet with the best of what humanity has to offer.
For decades, Palestine has suffered a prolonged conflict that has undermined regional stability and prevented the dream of a just and lasting peace. Occupation, forced displacement and genocide have brought the Palestinian people devastation and destruction, creating an open-air prison for thousands and thousands of people, most of them children and women. Peace and security in Palestine will not be achieved without a true commitment to respecting human rights and ending the genocide. Bolivia reiterates its full support for the exercise of self-determination and independence of Palestine, within the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, and hopes that it will soon become a full Member of the United Nations.
Before the Assembly, I wish to reaffirm Bolivia’s commitment to the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter and international law. We recognize the United Nations as the principal multilateral body created by humankind to promote development, peace and security not only within our borders, but also in the international arena.
In that context, Bolivia once again reaffirms its firm intention to comply with all decisions and resolutions of the judicial bodies of the international system. In that regard, Bolivia appealed to the International Court of Justice in The Hague in a process related to sovereign access to the Pacific Ocean. The Court urged Bolivia and Chile to pursue their dialogue and exchanges in a spirit of good-neighbourliness to address issues related to sovereign access to the Pacific Ocean, the solution of which both parties have recognized as a matter of mutual interest. The Court called on both countries to identify, on the basis of dialogue, a solution that is favourable to both peoples, with the goal of granting Bolivia the sovereign access to the Pacific Ocean that it enjoyed at the time of its declaration of independence, as the Court itself recognized in the corresponding ruling. My country is willing to engage in dialogue when our counterpart is ready to do so. We believe that access to the sea is a right of the Bolivian people and others.
Bolivia calls on the international community to protect and support indigenous peoples, who have been the guardians of biodiversity and ancestral knowledge. We are currently facing vulnerabilities aggravated by various crises. It is important to recognize their contribution to climate action. Their knowledge and practices are fundamental and offer us a new development model for living well in harmony with Mother Earth. In that regard, I would also like to share our concern about the negative classification of the coca leaf, which for indigenous and peasant peoples represents part of our identity and culture. Furthermore, we propose that we continue to advance and deepen gender policies and social relations, incorporating the approach of decolonization and depatriarchalization, which will allow us to transform the power structures and social relations that have perpetuated gender inequality and the oppression of women.
Today, on behalf of the Bolivian people and Constitutional President Luis Arce Catacora, we reaffirm our democratic conviction and the well-being of the Bolivian people in order to quickly achieve the 2030 Agenda and to live well in harmony with Mother Earth. We regret that internal and external interests are currently creating conflict in our country and trying to destabilize a democratic Government, but we are sure that with the support and accompaniment of all countries represented here we will maintain and strengthen the democracy and institutions of our country.
Bolivia is a nation that has demonstrated throughout its history that its democratic spirit is unbreakable. Strengthening our institutions and guaranteeing a future of peace, stability and progress for all is the only objective of our Government. Long live the peoples of the world!
