My greetings to all, and specifically to the Palestinian delegation, which is taking part in this opening session for the first time, albeit as an observer State, as well as to President Abbas, who is here today.
The day before yesterday, here in this Hall, we adopted the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1). The difficult path to its adoption shows how our collective capacity for negotiation and dialogue has weakened. Its limited scope is also an expression of a paradox of our time, which is that we circle around possible commitments, and that leads to inadequate results. Not even the tragedy of the coronavirus disease enabled us to unite around a treaty on pandemics at the World Health Organization. We need to go much further and provide the United Nations with the necessary means to face the dizzying changes in the international panorama. We are living in a time of growing anguish, frustration, tension and fear.
We are witnessing an alarming escalation of geopolitical disputes and strategic rivalries. In 2023 we witnessed the achievement of the sad record of the highest number of conflicts since the Second World War. Global military spending grew for the ninth consecutive year, reaching $2.4 trillion. More than $90 billion has been allocated to nuclear arsenals. Those resources could have been used to finance the fight against hunger and climate change. What we are seeing is an increase in military capabilities. The use of force without the support of international law is becoming the rule.
We are witnessing two simultaneous conflicts with the potential to become widespread conflagrations. In Ukraine, with regret, we are seeing the war extending without any prospect of peace. Brazil has firmly condemned the invasion of Ukrainian territory. It is already clear that neither side will be able to achieve all their objectives through military means. The use of increasingly destructive weapons brings to mind the darkest days of the sterile cold war confrontation. Creating conditions for resuming direct dialogue between the parties is crucial at this time. This is the message of the six-point understanding that China and Brazil have presented with a view to establishing a dialogue and ending the hostilities.
In Gaza and the West Bank, we are witnessing one of the greatest humanitarian crises in recent history, which is now spreading dangerously into Lebanon. What began as a terrorist action by fanatics against innocent Israeli civilians has become a collective punishment of the entire Palestinian people. There have been more than 40,000 fatalities, mostly women and children. The right to defence has become the right to vengeance, hindering agreement on the release of hostages and on a ceasefire.
Furthermore, forgotten conflicts in the Sudan and Yemen are causing excruciating suffering to nearly 30 million people. This year, the number of people in need of humanitarian aid in the world will reach 300 million.
In times of increasing polarization, expressions such as “deglobalization” have become commonplace. But it is impossible to “deplanetize” our life together. We are doomed to climate change interdependence. The planet is no longer waiting to demand payment from the next generation and is fed up with unfulfilled climate agreements. It is tired of neglected carbon reduction targets and the failure to deliver financial aid to poor countries.
Denialism succumbs to the evidence of global warming. The year 2024 is on track to be the hottest in modern history. Hurricanes in the Caribbean, typhoons in Asia, droughts and floods in Africa and torrential rains in Europe are leaving a trail of death and destruction. In the south of Brazil, we had the biggest flood since 1941. The Amazon is experiencing the worst drought in 45 years. Forest fires have spread across the country, devouring 5 million hectares in August alone.
My Government will not outsource its responsibilities, nor will it abdicate its sovereignty. We have already done so much, but we know that more needs to be done. In addition to facing the challenge of the climate crisis, we are fighting against those who profit from environmental degradation. We will not tolerate environmental crime, illegal mining and organized crime. We reduced deforestation in the Amazon by 50 per cent in the past year, and we will eradicate it by 2030.
It is no longer acceptable to think about solutions for tropical forests without listening to indigenous peoples, traditional communities and all those who live in them. Our sustainable development vision is based on the potential of the bioeconomy. Brazil will host the thirtieth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP30) in 2025, in the conviction that multilateralism is the only way to overcome the climate emergency. Our nationally determined contribution will be presented later this year, in line with the goal of limiting the increase in the planet’s temperature to 1.5°C.
Brazil stands out as a source of opportunities in a world that is being revolutionized by the energy transition. Today, we are one of the countries with the cleanest energy mix. Some 90 per cent of our electricity comes from renewable sources, such as biomass, hydroelectrical power, solar power and wind power. We made the choice to adopt biofuels 50 years ago, long before the discussion about alternative energies gained traction. We are at the forefront of other important niches, such as green hydrogen production. It is time to face the debate about the slow pace of the planet’s decarbonization and to work for an economy that is less reliant on fossil fuels.
Since 2014, Latin America has been experiencing a second lost decade. The region’s average growth during that period has been just 0.9 per cent, less than half of that seen in the “lost decade” of the 1980s. This combination of low growth and high levels of inequality results in harmful effects on the political landscape. Engulfed by disputes often unrelated to the region, our vocation for cooperation and understanding has been weakened. There is no justification for Cuba’s continued inclusion on a unilateral list of States that allegedly promote terrorism nor for the application of unilateral coercive measures that unduly punish the most vulnerable populations. In Haiti, joint action is urgently needed to restore public order and promote development.
In Brazil, defending democracy implies taking continuous action against extremist, messianic and totalitarian attacks which spread hatred, intolerance and resentment. Brazilians will continue to oppose those who try to undermine institutions and put them at the service of reactionary interests. Democracy must respond to the legitimate aspirations of those who are no longer willing to accept hunger, inequality, unemployment and violence. In a globalized world, it makes no sense to resort to false patriots and isolationists. Nor is there hope in resorting to ultraliberal experiments that only worsen the difficulties of an impoverished continent. The future of our region depends, above all, on building a sustainable, efficient and inclusive State that tackles all forms of discrimination, a future that is not intimidated by individuals, corporations or digital platforms that consider themselves above the law.
Freedom is the first victim of a world with no rules. Essential elements of sovereignty include the right to prescribe laws, adjudicate disputes and enforce rules within one’s territory, including the digital environment. The State which we are building is sensitive to the needs of the most vulnerable, without giving up its sound macroeconomic foundations. The false opposition between the State and the market has been abandoned by developed nations, which have returned to implementing active industrial policies and enforcing strong regulation of the domestic economy.
In the area of artificial intelligence, we are experiencing the consolidation of asymmetries that could lead to a true knowledge oligopoly. The unprecedented concentration of such technologies in the hands of a small number of people and companies based in an even smaller number of countries is advancing. We are interested in an emancipatory artificial intelligence that bears the face of the global South, strengthens cultural diversity, respects human rights, protects personal data and promotes information integrity. Above all, it must be a tool for peace, not war. We need a system of intergovernmental governance of artificial intelligence, in which all States have a seat.
The conditions for accessing financial resources remain prohibitive for most low- and middle-income countries. The debt burden limits the fiscal room to invest in health and education, reduce inequalities and address climate change. African countries borrow at rates up to eight times higher than Germany and four times higher than the United States. It is a Marshall Plan in reverse, in which the poorest finance the richest. Without the greater participation of developing countries in the management of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, there will be no effective change.
While progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals lags behind, the world’s 150 largest companies have collectively made $1.8 trillion in profits over the past two years. The fortunes of the top five billionaires have more than doubled since the start of this decade, while 60 per cent of humankind has become poorer. The super-rich pay far less tax proportionally than the working class. To remedy that anomaly, Brazil has insisted on international cooperation in developing minimum global taxation standards. The data on the state of food insecurity in the world released by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations two months ago is shocking. The number of people going hungry around the world has increased by more than 152 million since 2019. That means that 9 per cent of the world’s population — around 733 million people — is undernourished. While the problem is especially severe in Africa and Asia, it also persists in parts of Latin America. Women and girls make up a majority of the people facing hunger around the world. Pandemics, armed conflicts, climate events and agricultural subsidies in rich countries are increasing the scope of the scourge.
Hunger is not just the result of external factors, however. It is the result above all of political choices. Today the world produces more than enough food to eradicate hunger. What is missing is the creation of conditions that can make food affordable. That is my Government’s most urgent commitment — to ending hunger in Brazil, as we did in 2014. In 2023 alone, we lifted 24.4 million people out of severe food insecurity. The Global Alliance against Hunger and Poverty, which we will launch in Rio de Janeiro in November, was born of that political will and spirit of solidarity. It will be one of the main legacies of the Brazilian presidency of the Group of 20 and is open to the whole world. Anyone who wants to join our collective effort is welcome.
The Charter of the United Nations, which is nearly 80 years old, has never undergone comprehensive reform. It has been amended only four times, all of them between 1965 and 1973, and the current version fails to address some of humankind’s most pressing challenges. When the United Nations was founded, it had 51 Member States. Today it has 193. At that time, many countries, mainly on the African continent, were under colonial rule and had no say in the Organization’s goals and functioning. In addition, there is still no gender balance in the highest positions, and the position of Secretary-General has never been held by a woman. As we approach the end of the first quarter of the twenty-first century, the United Nations is increasingly empty and paralysed. We must act urgently to restore the prerogatives of the Organization that derive from its status as a universal forum. Individual adjustments are not enough. We need to think about a comprehensive review of the Charter.
Any reform should include certain goals. They are the transformation of the Economic and Social Council into the main forum for dealing with sustainable development and the fight against climate change, with a real capacity to inspire financial institutions; the revitalization of the role of the General Assembly, including in matters of international peace and security; the strengthening of the Peacebuilding Commission; and reform of the Security Council, focusing on its composition, working methods and veto power, in order to make it more effective and representative of contemporary realities. The exclusion of the countries of Latin America and Africa from permanent seats on the Security Council is an unacceptable echo of the domination practices of the colonial past. The discussion should be promoted in a transparent way, in consultation with the Group of 77, the Group of 20, the countries — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa — that make up the BRICS group, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community and so many other relevant groups.
I have no illusions about the complexity of reforms such as these, which will face entrenched interests in maintaining the status quo. It will require enormous negotiation efforts, but that is our responsibility. We cannot wait for another global tragedy like the Second World War to finally build a new global governance system out of the rubble. The will of the majority will persuade those who cling to the raw expression of the mechanisms of power. The aspirations of humankind are echoed in this plenary. We are engaging in the world’s greatest debates here. In this forum we seek answers to the problems afflicting the world. It is up to the General Assembly — the greatest expression of multilateralism — to pave the way for the future.
