We need a reset. And we need to reset. Those of us here today, representing our brothers and our sisters the world over, have endured four years of polycrises. As the children of Mother Earth, we continue to wrestle with the climate crisis. As a human family, we grapple with the legacy of the pandemic. As a digitally connected people, we are now, regrettably, confronted by multiple theatres of war and scenes of horror and famine flowing from those wars — armed conflict instead of pursued development. Citizens of every country struggle to contain the rising cost of living and the implications for them and their families on a day-to-day basis. We are all now threatened by the second but silent pandemic of antimicrobial resistance, together with a growing incidence of death and disability from chronic non-communicable diseases. We cannot afford the distraction of war. If ever there were a time to pause and to reset, it is now.
Collectively, as an international community, and individually, as leaders in each of our countries, we must now deliver new opportunities and solutions to those crises, which dampen economic growth, restrict the ambitions of our peoples and numb our sense of the beauty and goodness the world ought to be offering because it has it to offer. The reset for which I am calling and, indeed, all our citizens are demanding must see an end to all forms of discrimination. The rules and institutions that exist today, which create first- and second-class citizens — as we have said from this rostrum year after year — depending on one’s nation of origin, militate against trust, credibility and hope and foster a crisis of confidence in the existing international order, which must become inclusive and responsive for all. More than any other complaint from this rostrum has been that concerning the disparities, mistreatment and inability to ensure fair and transparent treatment for all that would lead to the trust necessary for us to solve the problems of our times.
Neocolonialist structures that reflect and perpetuate an old world order characterized by racism, classism and misogyny, while ignoring the legitimate aspirations of billions, will not help to foster the hope or trust that are necessary to meet those polycrises. We must ensure that global institutions give developing countries, especially small vulnerable States like my own, and vulnerable middle-income countries seats at the table of decision-making where we can be seen, heard, become active agents in our own cause and lead our own development paradigms.
We are reminded that 2024 is the final year of the United Nations Decade of People of African Descent. Much has been achieved, but the recognition, justice and development for people of African descent that were promised by the Decade have, to say the least, not yet been fully realized. It is for that reason that the Caribbean Community and my own country in particular join the growing chorus for the immediate proclamation of a second decade to complete the unfinished work and address the matter of reparations for slavery and colonialism. I start there because this is a necessary but complex conversation, and the Caribbean Community is resolute that it must happen. I want to be very clear that its resolution lies in a multigenerational approach, in the same way that the ₤20 million debt that was incurred by the British Government for the compensation of slavery in the nineteenth century was only repaid in the twenty-first century, almost 200 years later. The notion of unaffordability becomes a non-issue once we recognize that the solution to reparations must be multigenerational and grounded in development.
Of necessity, the reset must also be characterized by institutional reform, which has to start in the United Nations councils. Those councils suggest that some are full members and others are only partial, part-time or occasional members. All of that has no place in the twenty-first century. The anger and mistrust of our citizens in institutions, in leaders and in multilateralism and its processes that exclude, while yielding much talk and little action, are very real.
Nowhere are reform and, consequently, trust and hope more important to the well-being of billions of people today than in relation to the global financial architecture. Restricted access to capital, its disproportionately high cost, barring us from doing what we must, its inadequate scale and the overwhelming burden of debt, often imposed on us by circumstances beyond our control, are now combining to force Governments of the world’s poorest countries and, frankly, across many vulnerable middle-income countries to devote more resources to debt servicing than to health, education and, in some instances, even infrastructure. For far too many members of the human family, cold ground is their bed and rock is their pillow. Too many go to bed with their bellies hungry and too many not even have a bed. Our reset must therefore collectively build a common agenda that reflects and reinforces our shared humanity. It is that shared humanity which binds us together.
You know better than most, Mr. President, that our African brothers and sisters got it right with their principle of ubuntu and have used that principle in the General Assembly to remind us that its simplicity is what we should aspire to. “I am because you are; I am because we are. My well-being is tied to yours and our collective well-being is connected to Mother Earth’s”. That best voices the approach needed to give expression to the reset that is absolutely necessary.
We acknowledge that there are glimpses of hope. For example, on Monday we agreed to the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), but we still have war. We have agreed on the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I), but we still have raging pandemics and a slow-motion silent pandemic. All of that rests on the common agenda that the Secretary General set out for us earlier. Yesterday, we agreed on the Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting on Antimicrobial Resistance. Those are a lot of fancy words, but that is where the rubber hits the road because all of us in the Hall know people who have died from infections and for whom antibiotics are simply no longer effective, so that within 48 hours a person’s life can be snuffed out almost as if they were at war. Following on the intervention of the Bridgetown Initiative and the Paris Pact for People and Planet, the outcomes of efforts of many across the board, we acknowledge that there is some hope, and it is evident in the beginnings of the reform that we are seeing. It is coming little by little but nevertheless it has started.
Those are all important steps, but we cannot take our eyes off the prize. Barbados’ call for a fundamental reset includes attitudes and behaviours as much as actions or reforms. Heads of Government are in agreement that we must trigger national development agendas of transformation both with speed and at scale. We have a date with destiny against 1.5°C. We know that that is what is needed to survive and the implications for people, even as we speak, can be dire. But if there is a failure to act with clarity of purpose; if the lack of political will retards progress on the front of much-needed reform within the international financial institutions purely because Heads of Government do not speak to ministers of finance or board directors when they reach Washington, D.C.; if there is a need for that to be dealt with, there must be a commitment to being equal to the current challenges of Member States if we are not to perpetuate the discriminatory practices that result in undermining the transformational opportunities that we need. Depriving vulnerable countries of being able to access concessional income that is enough to build the resilience to save lives and to protect livelihoods is unjust.
That is why we must remain focused. That is why we launched yesterday the third iteration of the Bridgetown Initiative, which identifies three key principles. They are very simple.
First, we must change the rules of the international financial system and reform its governance and instruments. Secondly, we must shock-proof vulnerable economies by dealing with debt and liquidity in a comprehensive, development-focused manner, and if we need to give countries a shot of liquidity like we give them a shot of adrenaline in order to prevent them from falling off the cliff of debt, then we must do so. Thirdly, we must augment financing by boosting country capacity to invest in resilience by several means, including something that has already been announced — the rechannelling of special drawing rights (SDRs) through our multilateral development partners. But that will be truly effective only if there is another issuance of SDRs in the near future.
Indeed, we must also address the challenge — and this I believe to be the fundamental mission of this generation — of how we are going to secure the global public commons to be able to maintain our safety and stability as a global community. We are going to have to discuss how we can secure it and, of course, how we must finance it. That is not only the climate crisis or the loss of biodiversity that we speak about, but the other many global challenges that can truly destabilize countries and regions.
Those considerations are of fundamental importance to the sustainable existence of our future generations. The Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) is another story of promises made but not kept. Thirty years ago, the international community gathered in my country to take action for the first time on the unique challenges faced by small island developing States. We birthed in my home country the first ever global agenda for small island developing States, which became known as the Barbados Programme of Action. I thank Mauritius for its strategy of implementation, and we are grateful for the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action. They were the carriers of the baton of a development agenda for small island developing States in the intervening years in the face of multiple global crises, from health to climate to finance.
Yes, the vulnerabilities of our countries as small States have become more pronounced. In May, we gathered in Antigua and Barbuda for the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States, and I call on the international community and the multilateral system to let us work together to ensure that the promise created in Bridgetown in 1994 is delivered and realized through the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS 2024.
Let me take this opportunity as well to inform the General Assembly that two days ago we took over the chairship of the Climate Vulnerable Forum — the Vulnerable Group of 20 (V20) countries of the world — from Ghana, whose President I would like to thank for his excellent stewardship of the Group over the past two years and, indeed, for the strengthening of its institutional capacity. The priorities of our term as Chair of the V20 countries will be dealing with the multiple dimensions of climate crisis, the impact of the climate crisis on human health and, of course, the issue of debt and climate, because if we do not solve that, we cannot take the appropriate actions to deal with climate. I invite all United Nation Members that are not yet members of the V20 but that are climate vulnerable to join the Group because it is only through the amplification of our voices and the consistency of our message and solidarity that we will continue to see the pace and scale of reforms that we need to be able to save our peoples’ lives. I commend the declaration of the leaders of the Climate Vulnerable Forum that was adopted on Wednesday.
Above all else, we need a global reset on peace. There needs to be global peace, and those of us who are old enough will have recognized that there are peaks and valleys as it relates to the issue of conflict. There are few areas where the world is more in need of the United Nations, acting as a United Nations to secure the objectives of the Charter, than in the area of peace and security. The silence that has engulfed the Sudan is unacceptable and may well be rooted in the racism that the world still carries as a badge of honour from the victories of the Second World War. The actions in Myanmar cannot continue. Ukraine has sucked more oxygen out of the global community and the global financial system than any of us can appropriately accept at the very time when the world needs to be applying its resources and efforts to fighting the greatest crisis known to humankind. From the spread of the war from Gaza to the consequences in the West Bank and now to what is clearly happening in Lebanon as we speak — all of those are about the tip of an iceberg of death, violence and instability that rob the global community of oxygen and resources at the very time when we need them most in a strategic way.
We all know, as students of history, that even the longest war in history comes to an end. These wars too will come to an end, but the question is when and at what cost and with how much loss of life, with how many children either not being given the chance to live or who will now live with memories of war that will affect their every action for the next 60, 70 or 80 years of their lives. Innocent people are paying the price with the one thing that is theirs to give, and they do not give it willingly. It is their life.
Unless we address the root causes of those wars one by one and the manners in which they are being sustained and financed, we will never, ever know anything else other than war and rumours of war in those theatres. The transmittal of those scenes of horror in real time into people’s bedrooms and living rooms will trigger two extreme reactions, neither of which is acceptable to us in the third decade of the twenty-first century. We will either get the desensitizing of ordinary people to the loss of lives, especially those of innocent children and women, on the one hand, or, on the other, we will get the anger and inclination for vengeance that it necessarily spawns. We need peace and it cannot be too difficult for us to work for peace.
It is the same Bible that tells us, in the stories of the Old Testament, much that has guided many people across this world, but when we turn from the Old Testament to the New Testament, it is Romans that says to us, “Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord”. It does not belong to any country or any human being. The Bible cannot be used as a convenient aid when it suits us and rejected when it does not. In the midst of this maelstrom, we were very clear. My country took the step this year of recognizing and establishing diplomatic relations with the State of Palestine, in spite of having supported a two-State solution since 1969. We did so because it was clear to us that the State and the people of Palestine, human beings, are entitled to full recognition through integration into and support from the international community. The Charter does not say “We the people, with the exception of any one group from any one part of the world”. We join with others, therefore, in congratulating the State of Palestine on taking its seat among the United Nations Member States, as it did on 10 September.
Let me be clear — we condemn the actions of Hamas on 7 October, but we equally and strongly deplore the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza, which is the result of the disproportionate use of force by Israel. There is no justification for it. That is why treaties exist to govern the rules of engagement in war, because we as human beings learned better and know better and committed to better. A two-State solution, no matter how elusive it may appear to be now, is the only answer. I have already said this week that we have known difficult battles in humankind’s history; when we were in it, we did not think we could achieve it but we did. We abolished slavery. We removed apartheid in South Africa. Those difficult battles are not beyond our creativity, our capacity and our resilience to resolve them.
Similarly, we insist that the killing in Ukraine really has to stop. The people of Ukraine must be allowed to live within the internationally recognized boundaries of their State in peace and freedom from the use or threat of use of force. As I said, it is sucking too much oxygen out of the global financial system and countries that should be the beneficiaries of aid are being told that they may have to wait in the interests of the defence of others because of war. I say that, truly, there has to be a singular commitment to building peace — truly.
My own region has not escaped the scourge of instability and violence. The Americas do not constitute today a theatre of war, but we have been witnessing for some years now an unprecedented escalation in the number and calibre of assault weapons that are finding themselves in the hands of criminals who are wreaking havoc on our legal systems and our societies, particularly in the small island developing States of the Caribbean and, indeed, in the wider regions of Central and Latin America. That scourge, caused by guns manufactured primarily in the United States of America, also requires a fundamental reset. The right of persons to bear arms in countries not engaged in military conflict should not be an opening to accept as legitimate the presence of assault weapons in other countries. It is simply not right. There is no place for assault weapons in our societies.
I turn now to the fate of the people of Haiti, which continues to be of major concern to our people in the Caribbean region. The global community now has an opportunity for an essential reset with how it addresses its relationship with Haiti, which has been borne in all kinds of partial concern over the course of the past few decades. We continue to have it as a recurrent decimal because we have failed to solve the problems and put them on a sustainable path to development for its people. What is needed is transformation of our sister nation. Yes, we must provide security first and foremost, but transformation must be its handmaiden. The Government and the people of Haiti need the full support of the international community, not just in the short term but in the long term. That starts by extending the mandate of the Multinational Security Support Mission; escalating the work of the United Nations; deploying all the tools of bilateral, regional and global cooperation, not excluding for spurious reasons countries that want to participate; and ensuring, by significantly increasing the pledged funds, that those of us who want to step up to the plate can do so, because we know that it takes cash to be able to deploy the forces and the police necessary to help with the restoration so that Haitian mother or that Haitian child can go about her day-to-day life without fear of being assaulted, killed or denied the right to work because of her simple fear of walking the streets.
The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) has been working hard this year to support our largest member State, and in the early part of the first few months of this year we met on Haiti almost three to four times a week to guarantee the stability that we ask the United Nations now to help us secure. We are grateful for the efforts of the Eminent Persons Group of former CARICOM Prime Ministers, who were on the front line of helping to resolve that complex problem day in and day out so that we could find a political consensus for Haiti. The fact that both the interim President of the Transitional Council and Prime Minister Conille were able to come the General Assembly is a remarkable achievement, given where Haiti was in February. They must be allowed to continue on the path of securing their future.
We cannot be on this rostrum speaking about Haiti without thanking Kenya and President Ruto for their remarkable leadership. After many delays and in what represents now a historical precedent for an African country, they have ensured that an African country has taken the lead in helping to tackle a peace and security challenge beyond its own continent. That is the kind of reset that we need in the international community.
I look forward to the day when I will not have to ask for a reprieve for the people of Cuba. The situation there is unacceptable, it is unconscionable and the fact that it continues today is a mark on our international conscience. The Cuban people continue to face the direst of economic circumstances and that is directly as a result of Cuba’s exclusion and designation as a State sponsor of terrorism. Our only knowledge of terrorism and Cuba is in fact the downing of the Cubana aircraft off the waters of Barbados, in which Cubans, Guyanese and Koreans were killed.
Cuba has been a valuable partner, stepping up for us when it has mattered most by providing nurses and doctors in pandemics and other essential workers when the global community has needed it and when people needed to be liberated in southern Africa. The reality is that we must have and continue to have resolve in calling for the embargo to be lifted. We will condemn it year after year after year, because it is simply wrong. As we say so, we pray for the people of Cuba as they determine what damages they have incurred from Hurricane Helen, and for the people of Florida, who clearly are going to spend the next few days identifying the damage as a result of a hurricane that hit Category 4 when it reached Florida.
That is the climate crisis that we speak about. The people of Nigeria are still counting the bodies with respect to the floods that took place there. We have hard work to do in our own Caribbean region. Hurricane Beryl literally decimated Carriacou and Union islands and indeed could have affected Grenada and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines more broadly. Jamaica’s and my own country’s coastal infrastructure was significantly affected, with 90 per cent of our fishing industry being decimated. This season of superlatives, with its floods and droughts, its hurricanes and fires will take the lives and livelihoods of too many. The climate crisis is hitting us almost weekly across the globe. The deniers of the climate crisis also need a reset — a reset that will admit of the absolute necessity of collective action by the global community to save our way of life and our planet.
At the start of this week, the skies were much darker. I truly believe so. We are starting to see some glimmers of light. We leave New York this week, noting that the clouds are lifting and conscious that the sun is peeping out in certain areas — not all, but in certain critical areas, giving us a sense of renewed hope that reset is in fact not only possible, but necessary in key areas: institutional reform, reform in our financial architecture, reform in how we view development, but above all else, reform in how we see each other and value each other.
That hope springs from the Pact for the Future and the many declarations that we have made here, the terms in which my fellow leaders have spoken from this rostrum for the most part — the urgent need to recognize and reset, reset, reset, even if they did not call it by that name. It is as if we all truly understand and accept the challenge of rising to solve the major difficulties that are faced by the people of the world and to recognize that global moral strategic leadership requires us to commit to redressing the wrongs and to take care to save people and planet. Recognition of the need for the reset is the first step in any issue, but what is now also needed is eternal vigilance as a companion. As we take the steps to transform attitudes, institutions and rules, we will not succeed overnight; we will not succeed even in the next decade. But if we do not do the reset to change the legacy of centuries of exploitation and domination, we will not be fit for purpose to meet the needs of our people in the third decade of the twenty-first century.
I can therefore think of no better way to conclude than by quoting a song from my own country that I had cause to cite almost 30 years ago, when I first stood on this rostrum in 1995 as a young Minister of Youth (see A/50/PV.42). The song is by Edwin Yearwood.
A voice in my head keep talk to me It tells me the road is long It tells me we must be strong
Roll with the pain and strife Today is the start of the rest of your life.
May the new hope fostered here this week signal the start of a new deal for people who have hitherto not been seen and, even with the existence of this body, whose voices and presence have been felt. Those people and their countries have been recognized too often as mere statistics and not with the human dignity that is their birth right and their conferred right from the United Nations.
