I wish to start by extending my congratulations to Mr. Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. He can be assured of Botswana’s full support as he steers the work of this organ.
The Assembly continues to meet against the backdrop of an age of multiple and interconnected crises triggered by the coronavirus disease pandemic and geopolitical tensions between major Powers. Those crises have been further compounded by the Israel-Hamas war, which erupted shortly after we concluded last year’s high-level week. The attacks on innocent civilians on both sides are unacceptable and, therefore, stand condemned. In the same vein, we wish to express our deep concern about the situation in the Gaza Strip, where the war has resulted in catastrophic humanitarian crises and unprecedented fatalities among civilians, including children and humanitarian workers.
I should also register Botswana’s concern regarding the loss of lives of United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) personnel. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to UNRWA personnel and all humanitarian workers and their commitment to deliver aid, save lives and alleviate suffering in Gaza and elsewhere. We owe them a debt of gratitude, and they deserve our full protection. Botswana also abhors attacks on UNRWA installations and condemns disinformation and misinformation campaigns against that life-saving, General Assembly-mandated Agency.
Botswana firmly supports the work of UNRWA, which entails providing humanitarian and development assistance and protection to Palestinian refugees, pending the just resolution of the Palestinian question. In that regard, Botswana is proud to be among the countries that joined the statement of shared commitments on UNRWA, which reaffirms support for the Agency, its mandate and its staff and highlights its indispensable role during this difficult time.
We wish to reiterate the centrality of the two-State solution in resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the attainment of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. We therefore urge parties to commit to a political process that will pave the way for the realization of the two-State solution, wherein Palestine and Israel live side by side in peace and security based on the pre-1967 borders.
The war in Ukraine also rages on, with no indication of an end in sight. We continue to underscore the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. We also call on parties to give diplomacy and dialogue a chance and to seek a peaceful resolution.
In Africa, the guns have still not gone silent. We continue to grapple with armed conflict, terrorism and potentially explosive geopolitical tensions. We commend the African Union (AU) and subregional bodies, as well as the United Nations, for their efforts in addressing those challenges. In that vein, we welcome the adoption of Security Council resolution 2719 (2023), on the provision of support by the United Nations to AU-led peace support operations on a case-by-case basis, and look forward to its operationalization.
I must add that this time of escalated armed conflicts, violent crime and humanitarian crises requires intensified efforts and more vigilance to protect human rights, advance humanitarian action and promote accountability in line with the United Nations Charter, international law and international humanitarian law, as well as relevant principles, such as the responsibility to protect.
It is evident that peace is under strain across the world. It needs to be revitalized. However, that task cannot be left only to multilateral and regional bodies. Governments have a responsibility to create conditions that enable peace to thrive within their countries. Key steps that Governments should take include building effective institutions, committing to good governance, protecting human rights and upholding democratic values.
As many are aware, Botswana has a long track record of commitment to those democratic principles. The implementation of recommendations from our recently concluded constitutional review process, as well as our upcoming general elections, on 30 October 2024, provide opportunities to deepen our democracy and strengthen our good governance credentials.
Regrettably, as the scourge of war rages on, the promise of sustainable development is in great peril. It is deeply concerning that, with only six years before the 2030 deadline, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are way off track. We learned from the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024 that only 17 per cent of the Goals are on track, while the rest range from moderate progress to stagnation and, even, regression.
There is a lot of work to do. We must take inspiration from and build on the success achieved in the reduction in global child mortality, the prevention of HIV infections, the attainment of girls’ parity with boys in education and increased access to energy and to the Internet, while also scaling up action and investments in areas that are lagging far behind, particularly poverty eradication. The levels of extreme poverty remain disturbingly high, and we cannot attain sustainable development without eradicating poverty in all its forms and manifestations. Poverty eradication is the sine qua non of sustainable development.
A comprehensive approach will be required to move the needle in the fight against poverty. We therefore endorse the call for comprehensive social protection systems and inclusive economic policies. Pro-poor policies should also be complemented and reinforced by policies that spur inclusive economic growth and create sustainable employment. Policy interventions that are aimed at leaving no one behind ought to be matched by adequate SDG financing. In that vein, my delegation reiterates the call for predictable, sustainable and sufficient development financing to developing countries from all funding sources.
In addition to livelihood issues, progress should also be accelerated in addressing other forms of inequality within countries, especially gender inequality. Meaningful action is needed to empower women and girls in areas where they are left behind and to combat harmful cultural practices and gender-based violence.
Extreme weather events and related natural disasters continue to remind us of the severity of the climate crisis and the urgency of mitigation and adaptation. In our subregion, Southern Africa, the El Niño phenomenon induced drought and floods that resulted in devastating consequences for livelihoods and a humanitarian situation that affected more than 61 million people. I take this opportunity to reiterate the importance of the Southern African Development Community’s regional humanitarian appeal of at least $5.5 billion, aimed at augmenting domestic resources of the affected Member States, including efforts for resource mobilization from national, regional and international partners in response to the effects of El Niño-induced droughts and floods.
I cannot overemphasize the need for adequate climate financing for effective climate action. We continue to remind developed countries of their annual $100 billion commitment in climate financing for developing countries until 2025 and call for a more ambitious goal thereafter.
Efforts towards attaining sustainable development ought to be redoubled in countries in special situations, in particular small island developing States, least developed countries and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs), which are disproportionately affected by development challenges.
Botswana, as an LLDC and current Chair of the Group of Landlocked Developing Countries at the United Nations, is deeply concerned about the enormity of the challenges faced by LLDCs in their effort to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its SDGs. With no direct territorial access to the sea, LLDCs struggle with international trade, connectivity and economic development. Our countries are cut off from the global marketplace and lack the means to develop adequate transport and logistics infrastructure, and therefore inevitably face significant challenges in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
The forthcoming third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, which will take place from 10–13 December 2024 in Gaborone, under the theme “Driving progress through partnerships”, will provide an opportunity to effectively address those challenges in an ambitious, action-oriented and forward-looking programme of action. I therefore invite transit countries, development partners and other stakeholders to join us in the beautiful and vibrant Gaborone as we shape the future for our 32 member countries.
As the President of the General Assembly rightly observes, it is only when we act together that we can effectively deliver meaningful progress for people, for the planet and for prosperity and peace while leaving no one behind. Without a doubt, the United Nations-led multilateral system remains an indispensable platform for the effective global action that this moment demands. It is therefore of paramount importance that the multilateral framework remain fit for purpose.
The onus is on us, as Member States, to ensure that our intergovernmental processes enable, rather than stifle, effective multilateral action and international cooperation. We must not allow the current geopolitical tensions and great Power rivalries to get in the way of progress. Our shared values, norms and interests as expressed in the Charter of the United Nations, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and other relevant frameworks should remain the North Star guiding our engagements. The spirit of consensus and solidarity ought to be at the front and centre of our actions.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming Botswana’s commitment to working constructively on all agenda items before the General Assembly during this session. The session offers opportunities to turbocharge action for peace, sustainable development and human rights for the benefit of present and future generations. Let us seize the moment.
