It is with renewed honour that, on behalf of the Central African Republic, my dear and beautiful country, I speak before the entire world represented here to make my contribution to the general debate on the theme of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly. By participating in the General Assembly, the Central African Republic reaffirms its commitment to contributing to the common search for the trust, peace, security, international solidarity and mutual understanding that are essential to the reconstruction of a peaceful world conducive to sustainable development and respect for the human dignity of present and future generations.
Before doing so, I would like to extend to Mr. Philemon Yang my warm congratulations on his outstanding and historic election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. His election is the symbol of an honour and a well-deserved tribute to our continent, Africa. It is also a source of immense pride and inspiration for the 51 million citizens of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa, whose Conference of Heads of State I have the honour of chairing, and in particular for the sister Republic of Cameroon, his beautiful country. His perfect knowledge of the international scene and his great personal qualities are an asset and a guarantee of the success of our work. I am convinced that he will best serve the interests of the United Nations and all its Member States and implement the vast United Nations reform programme to make it more effective, more inclusive, more representative and better adapted to the evolution of the world and to the resolution of the serious and immediate problems that are shaking all humankind. He can rest assured of the full support of the Central African Republic in that regard.
I would also like to commend the excellent work done and the results obtained by President Dennis Francis during the seventy-eighth session. I offer him the recognition and satisfaction of the Central African people.
To Secretary-General António Guterres, I reiterate the gratitude of the Central African Republic and the full support of its Government for his various initiatives aimed at making the United Nations, more than ever, a place where the efforts of nations can develop and harmonize.
As all know, on 30 July the Security Council decided (see S/PV.9695) to completely lift the unjust, illegitimate and iniquitous arms embargo imposed on the Central African Armed Forces, which had caused the country so much irreparable harm over the course of a decade. From this rostrum, I express the gratitude of the Central African people to the Security Council for that wise decision which, although overdue, has allowed my country to pursue its work to restore peace and national security and to act, alongside the other States of the world, for peace, sustainable development and the human dignity of present and future generations. I take this opportunity to reiterate the full gratitude of the Central African people to all who have kept the Central African Republic in mind and supported that noble fight.
A country with strong mining potential, the Central African Republic will, I am convinced, continue to benefit from their support for the total lifting of the embargo on diamonds imposed by the Kimberley Process, which limits its action for peace, sustainable development and the human dignity of present and future generations.
The theme of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development, and human dignity for present and future generations”, contains particularly important recommendations that will be of great weight in the discussions for the reform of the global architecture of peace and security and for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Peace, we know, is inexorably linked to sustainable development.
Unfortunately, as we gather each year in this great house of the world or in other circumstances, each as important as the other, the world continues to be confronted by serious existential threats and is becoming increasingly unstable and vulnerable. Our seventy-ninth session is being held in very turbulent global circumstances, undermined by growing geopolitical crises, including the wars between Russia and Ukraine, between Israel and Hamas, in the Sudan and in the East of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, terrorism, the deterioration of economic conditions that is stifling growth in Africa, and the rise in fuel prices. Convinced that only dialogue can put a lasting end to conflict, the Central African Republic urges the parties in conflict in various regions of the world to favour dialogue and diplomacy in order to find a solution to all the disagreements at the origin of those conflicts and save thousands of human lives.
In the Central African Republic, the security situation in 2024 is relatively stable. The country is preparing to strengthen its democratic anchoring through the upcoming organization of municipal and regional elections, which have not been held for four decades. In that perspective, special measures are being taken to defang the residual armed groups that, no longer able to control a portion of the territory, engage in acts of serious banditry and the illegal exploitation and fraudulent trafficking of natural resources in order to acquire military equipment and materials.
The nineteenth session of the Strategic Committee on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the commemoration in Bangui a few days ago of the Month of Amnesty in Africa by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union made it possible to appreciate at their true value the significant progress made thanks to the ownership and participation of all stakeholders in the global peace and security process, based on the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and the joint Luanda road map. Despite those advances, the Central African Republic faces many challenges, in particular the construction of barracks for the garrisoning of units in defence zones closer to threats, the acquisition of military equipment and materials for the Defence and Security Forces.
Climate change and its tragic effects, such as the deadly floods, drought and gigantic fires observed throughout the world, pose threats ranging from food and water insecurity, competition for natural resources to loss of livelihoods and population displacement. Those interdependent and cascading risks can have significant implications for peace, security and development across continents.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the epicentre of humanitarian crises, environmental disasters have this year caused more than 1,000 deaths and 4 million climate refugees, as well as inestimable material damage, particularly in neighbouring Chad, where the death toll has risen after days of heavy rains that have caused widespread flooding and forced evacuations. From this United Nations rostrum, the symbol par excellence of human solidarity, I express the solidarity of the Central African people with all the peoples of the world who have been hard hit by natural disasters.
In this world tormented by bloody conflicts and periodically threatened by deadly and devastating weather phenomena, the developing countries, impoverished by centuries of slavery, colonialism and neocolonialism — characterized by protean interference in their internal affairs, injustice in the remuneration of raw material prices and strong conditionalities imposed by the international financial architecture — are helplessly enduring the security, financial, economic, food and environmental challenges.
The promises of financing for vulnerable countries are slow to take shape and the mitigation measures taken at the Conferences of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in the face of the worrisome rise in temperature change like the weather, depending on the political, geopolitical and geostrategic interests of the major Powers. Aware of the danger of the climate phenomenon, my country has put in place sectoral policies whose effectiveness depends in part on climate financing that is still uncertain. The Central African Republic urges the United Nations to work more towards the implementation of the climate, peace and development nexus by creating synergy between climate adaptation and peacebuilding, in order to holistically absorb vulnerabilities linked to climate change, as well as fragility and the risks of conflict.
The world is dangerously close to the abyss. The current United Nations peace and security architecture is under enormous pressure. The reasons given by Africa in support of its legitimate request for reform of the Security Council and a right of veto are irrefutable. A step has just been taken by the United States of America, which supports the creation of two permanent seats for Africa on the Security Council and a rotating seat for small island developing States. That proposal is certainly commendable, but in view of the evolution of the world, Africa, long left aside, should not indulge such a proposal, which can only be analysed as a perpetual denial of the right of veto.
It is also time to accelerate the reform of the governance of the international financial architecture to address inequalities, mobilize adequate financing to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), meet the financing needs of developing countries and reform the implementation of and compliance with multilateral environmental agreements in order to realize our common ambition to protect the planet.
Demographers estimate that by 2050 half of the world’s young people will live in Africa and half of the 54 African countries will have seen their populations almost double. I welcome the Pact for the Future and its annexes, the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1), adopted at the Summit of the Future. It is time to accelerate the implementation of the SDGs in the field of science, technology, innovation and digital cooperation, with a focus on equity, right s and universality.
Today young people, key agents of positive change and important contributors to sustainable development, respect for human rights, global peace and security, face a number of vulnerabilities that prevent them from realizing their full potential and exercising their fundamental rights. We must therefore commit to transforming investment levels in favour of young people, women, girls and people living with disabilities in order to guarantee a better future for all. As for the Central African Republic, its ambitious National Development Plan for the period 2024-2028 establishes a better balance between the needs and interests of present and future generations by retaining the development of human capital as one of its strategic axes.
In conclusion, I hope that the spirit that led to the creation of the United Nations will continue to tirelessly exert its influence and help create a climate that will make it possible to resolve the problem of attacks on international peace and security and to achieve sustainable development in a manner satisfactory to all humankind.
