On the morning of 3 March 2002, I placed a ballot paper upon which I had written a definite “yes” in a ballot box. Earlier that day, numbers and projections were already appearing on television screens. It was not until the evening, however, that the verdict was clear: after a long and hard-fought voting campaign, Switzerland would join the United Nations. In the end, just a few hundred votes in the canton of Valais — my home region — proved decisive. The Swiss people subsequently expressed our country’s willingness to assume its responsibilities and participate in international politics in a spirit of solidarity. That was more than two decades ago, and today I am addressing the General Assembly just a few days before Switzerland assumes the presidency of the Security Council.
The world has changed, but our principles have not. Like many other countries, Switzerland is watching with concern the escalation of tensions around the world and the emergence of new conflicts. Unfortunately, we are seeing more and more gross violations of human rights and a blatant disregard for internationally recognized borders. Force is in danger of taking precedence over law and the use of force has increased dramatically.
Only together can we face up to the dynamic that the great writer Charles-Ferdinand Ramuz so aptly described a century ago:
“Because a misfortune never comes unless another one comes too;
misfortunes marry one another, they make children.”
Great challenges lie ahead of us, from wars and catastrophes to the damage we are inflicting on our own planet, as well as the risks and opportunities associated with technological progress. The United Nations, as the only universal Organization, is of central importance for addressing those issues. Making the decision to work better together, irrespective of political regimes, economic structures and cultural differences, is a start. The world must not be divided into blocs. That means we must be prepared to negotiate with all the major regions of the world, on the basis of principles that are in the interests of all and respected by all. International law must always form the foundation.
The quest for peace is paramount and Switzerland is committed to it. Out of a sense of solidarity, faithful to our tradition of good offices and because resignation and inaction must never be an alternative, Switzerland convened about 100 States and international organizations this summer for a high-level conference for peace in Ukraine. Our aim was to provide the initial impetus towards a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, based on international law and the Charter of the United Nations. We renew our invitation to the international community to spare no effort in supporting concrete measures and the joint communiqué on a peace framework.
International law is the foundation of our common efforts to achieve peace, security and prosperity in the world. The Geneva Conventions, the seventy-fifth anniversary of which we commemorate this year, govern the legal basis of warfare and consequently the protection of civilians. However, recent United Nations statistics paint a disastrous picture for the international community. Not only are civilian populations and infrastructure insufficiently protected but they are also under repeated attack.
We are witnessing violations of international humanitarian law from Myanmar to Ukraine and from the Middle East to the Sudan. My country is firmly committed to ensuring that the Security Council adopts ceasefire resolutions, particularly in Gaza and the Sudan. Those resolutions must be implemented and respected as a matter of urgency. We also insist on an immediate return to a total cessation of hostilities on both sides of the Blue Line.
The heavy toll paid by civilian populations in the current crises and conflicts reaffirms Switzerland’s determination to continue to make international humanitarian law an absolute priority. Respect for international humanitarian law is at the heart of our commitment to the Security Council. The protection of the civilian population cannot be taken for granted and is by no means guaranteed. We must afford it greater importance in conflict situations. The best condition for the protection of the civilian population is and will remain peace. It is in that spirit that my country is dedicated to promoting civil and military peace.
Although some peace missions have not achieved all of their objectives, they contribute day after day to human security, stability and peace. We must overcome disagreements when it comes to deciding on new missions. Peace is too precious to become a playground for vested interests. Alongside numerous international partners, Switzerland is making its contribution to peacebuilding and strengthening its commitment, wherever possible.
In addition to conflict- and peace-related issues, we face many other challenges that we must address as a matter of urgency. In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that the civilian population must be protected, not only during armed conflicts but also in the face of natural disasters. Climate change and the loss of biodiversity have existential consequences for a growing number of people. It is also critical that we maintain our commitments in those areas and that we strengthen them and take courageous steps for the future. Many international agreements concerning the environment and climate change are either not being implemented or are being implemented inadequately, which is leading to massive destruction of our environment.
I am also concerned about the rise in misinformation, which undermines the freedom of opinion based on facts. Private and State actors disseminate false information in their own and other countries in order to foment division, sow discord and destabilize States. Switzerland is firmly committed to the freedoms of expression and of the media. Disinformation is toxic. We aim to counter it by making a clearer distinction between what constitutes freedom of expression and the manipulation of facts by revealing illegitimate sources, promoting open and fair debate, and providing transparent and objective information as Governments and international organizations.
Switzerland is resolutely committed to strong and effective multilateralism. I am aware of the need for all States to work together to find solutions. My country is steeped in regular democratic debates at all levels of Government, within communes, cantons and the Confederation. There is an urgent need to re-establish such constructive and peaceful debates among States in order to meet existential challenges. The day before yesterday, we jointly adopted the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which is a strong commitment to multilateralism. One of its key dimensions is the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That is our road map, which we must implement together as quickly as possible. Ramuz also said that ideas must be born from a vision, like sparks from pebbles. His words remain relevant today. Let us be courageous and keep the faith. We need a framework in which we can work together in partnership to find solutions. The United Nations offers just such a framework. It is up to us to make this institution stronger.
