The year 2025 will mark 80 years since 51 countries took the momentous step of creating the United Nations. Our country, Chile, has always been a proud part of this collective effort. We were one of the founding countries, and today, almost 80 years later, we continue to defend democracy, peace, multilateralism and full respect for human rights.
Since 1945, the world has greatly changed. It must have been complex then — full of hope because the war had ended, but torn by the poverty, destruction and death the war left in its wake. Still scarred in 1945 by the disgrace of colonialism, the inexorable emancipation of peoples from their colonizers was already beginning to bubble up.
Once again, a great deal of time has passed since 1945, and the world has changed radically. Imagine if a 20-year-old from that era were to magically awaken in 2024. Surely, he or she would not be able to believe what he or she was seeing.
The world has changed, but some things have remained the same. An example of that, which is often cited from this rostrum, is the United Nations Security Council. Yet the world of 2024 is not the world of 1945.
I listened attentively this morning to Secretary-General António Guterres, President Lula da Silva of Brazil and President Biden of the United States of America explicitly express their agreement that the Council should be reformed in accordance with today’s times (see A/79/PV.7). Who or what is preventing this? Is there anyone in this Assembly who opposes such reform?
Chile proposes that we set a deadline for reform and that by the time the United Nations turns 80, it has a Security Council in keeping with the times, and that Brazil from Latin America, India, at least one African country, among others, play an important part. There is nothing to prevent that, except our lack of will. Human institutions depend on the will of their leaders — us — and those that are unable to adapt to their times run the risk of collapse. We need only recall the rapid collapse of the League of Nations. There are times when change is the best way to ensure the continuity of our history, and this is precisely one of those times.
The same goes for financial governance. We value the efforts undertaken by global financial institutions to modernize, but Chile supports, above all, the Nigeria-led African proposal to address tax evasion, illicit financial flows and inequalities in tax collection through the establishment of a convention on international tax cooperation, in order to achieve a more transparent and inclusive system, with a global tax system that supports the financing of the fight against the climate crisis, whereby countries and large corporations as well are held accountable for their financial transactions and contribute their fair share to the countries from which they have derived their wealth.
To meet these challenges and many others, I have no doubt that it is the possible leadership of a woman, as we agreed in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) adopted on a few days ago (see A/79/PV.3), coming from our Americas, in accordance with the United Nations territorial rotation criteria, that could guide this process by following the reformist path undertaken by António Guterres.
At times, the international community is accused of double standards in the face of human rights violations occurring in one part of the world or another. What the adversary does is condemned, but when a supposed friend or someone of the same political colour is the one who violates the United Nations Charter, ambiguity reigns.
Chile rejects double standards when it comes to human rights. As a young leftist Latin American president, I say loud and clear that human rights must be respected always and everywhere, and we must demand this respect regardless of the political colour of the dictator or president in office who violates such rights. Indeed, the Palestinian teenager murdered in Gaza, the Venezuelan worker forced to migrate from his homeland, the Ukrainian child kidnapped by Russia, the opponent silenced in Nicaragua, and the woman expelled from school in Afghanistan just for being a woman, are first and foremost human beings, and the voice of all nations, regardless of their political orientation, must be raised to defend them. That is the principled position that we in Chile support, beyond any geopolitical interest.
I therefore refuse to choose between Hamas’ terrorism or Netanyahu’s Israel’s massacres that lead to genocide. We do not have to choose between forms of savagery; I choose humanity.
We denounce the illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories and the de facto denial of the existence of an independent Palestinian State by the occupying country. Chile calls for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza to put an end to the suffering and massacre of the Palestinian population that has already claimed more than 40,000 lives. Imagine all the wounded. We also clearly and unambiguously demand the immediate release of the hostages currently held by the terrorist group Hamas.
In this Hall today, we wish to point out that Israel must respect international law, cease the establishment and expansion of illegal settlements in occupied Palestinian territory, and end the massacre in Gaza and the indiscriminate attacks it has been carrying out on the civilian population. As has consistently been the policy of Chile, we insist once again on the need to reach a two-State solution with defined, secure and internationally recognized borders, in accordance with the 1967 borders.
Furthermore, Russia’s aggression against Ukraine must stop. It is the United Nations that is called upon to put an end to this flagrant transgression of international law. We cannot accept that it is natural for one country to invade another and take over part of its territory. For medium-sized countries such as ours, demanding respect for international law is the main guarantee we have that our own sovereignty and our own territorial integrity will be respected.
Today, from this rostrum, I would like to place particular emphasis on the situation of the Ukrainian children kidnapped by Russia and taken to its territory. These children must be returned to their families.
Before this Assembly, Chile reaffirms its commitment to democracy as the only system capable of maintaining peace, achieving sustainable development and protecting the dignity, rights and fundamental freedoms of people. We therefore view with concern the growing disaffection of citizens everywhere for this form of government, including our own country. We also look with concern at the emergence of authoritarian leaders who persecute or insult those who disagree with them. It is our duty to speak out and combat those who erode democracy, whether by authoritarianism or by shamelessly spreading fake news. At the same time, we must be able to respond to the needs and distress of our citizens in order to restore their confidence in democratic institutions and mechanisms.
We see with concern how these threats loom over our region. Chile will continue to make efforts to build bridges between diverse societies and call for integrating the voices of Latin America and the world in order to promoting peace and stability, as we recently did with the President of the Government of Spain and the President of Brazil at the summit of progressive leaders. Such an approach does not prevent us from harshly condemning any violation of human rights, international law or attacks against democracy in sister countries.
Chile is particularly aware of the critical situation in Venezuela. We are facing a dictatorship that has intended to steal an election, persecutes its opponents and is indifferent to the exile, not of thousands, but of millions, of its citizens. What is needed to end this crisis is a political solution that recognizes that the opposition won the most recent elections and leads to a peaceful transition to a proper democracy.
At the same time, I must say that the unilateral sanctions imposed by the United States, referred to this morning by President Biden (see A/79/PV.7), are not helpful in solving the conflict; on the contrary, they worsen it. Economic sanctions are hitting the Venezuelan people harder than they are hitting the country’s current rulers, harming both the poor and workers, because the political crisis has been combined with an economic crisis. Together they have pushed more than 7 million — I repeat, 7 million — Venezuelans into exile outside their country, of whom approximately 800,000 are in Chile. It is my responsibility to be clear in this regard: Chile is not in a position to receive more migrants. We call on United States authorities to lift economic sanctions, which we in the South know bring only greater poverty to the people — and not to the dictators.
None of us, not even the most powerful, can face such phenomena as the climate crisis, pandemics, the digital revolution or transnational organized crime alone. We need each other. We also need the United Nations and a stronger, more active international community. This is the vision that we have promoted in our participation in the various bodies of the United Nations system. I would like in particular to highlight Chile’s presidency of the Economic and Social Council from July 2023 to July 2024, under the leadership of our Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Mrs. Paula Narváez Ojeda.
I also speak for all my fellow compatriots when I express before this Assembly our worry and concern about the increase in transnational organized crime and its devastating effects on the security and development of countries, and on democracy and people’s lives. It is essential that our governments act in a coordinated manner and craft public policies, strategies and operational capacity to help stop the financial, drug trafficking, human trafficking and arms trafficking crimes that affect our countries.
Security is the main concern of the majority of the Chilean people today; it is also the main concern in Latin America in general. States cannot surrender to or normalize violence and organized crime. They must stand firm against crime and corruption and be steadfast in building community and social cohesion in our societies.
Chile is also committed to the development of regulations for guiding the progress of artificial intelligence in an ethical, transparent and responsible manner, respecting human rights, protecting personal data and promoting the integrity of information and its use in the digital era. No doubt many of us have artificial intelligence applications on our mobile phones, but today artificial intelligence reproduces prejudices and stereotypes resulting from the reinforcement of existing biases in the databases with which they are trained. Are we going to trust the large companies to regulate themselves in this area? History teaches us that that does not work.
The international community must look out for the weakest among us, who are being excluded from this new world in formation, despite the fact that they too are entitled to take part in it. If we do not take action now, for example by demanding algorithm traceability, data audits and corrective human interventions, we might see a new kind of extermination in a few years — the digital extermination of non-hegemonic cultures and, along with it, the loss of humankind’s valuable diversity. Let us not allow that to happen.
Artificial intelligence and new technologies can be a significant contribution to the world. Let us recall Asimov’s first law of robotics, which, already in the middle of the previous century, urged us to establish that “[a] robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm”.
And, lastly, I must draw attention to the most important challenge we face as a generation: the climate emergency. Protecting and sustaining life on Earth is a task we must undertake now. I say that because Chile is a country ravaged by increasingly frequent drought, flooding and fires. As Member States know, borders are irrelevant in that regard. We are equally saddened by Cyclone Idai, which devastated Malawi and Mozambique a couple of years ago, or by major fires in Australia, the flooding in Bangladesh, the dry corridor of Central America, the threat the sea poses to the Maldives or the fires happening now in Córdoba, Argentina. Let us not deny science. Let us not deny our responsibility as humankind in the face of those crises.
We are doing our part from Chile — changing our energy matrix and leaving fossil fuels behind, moving towards carbon neutrality, protecting our seas and wildlife areas, taking care of Antarctica — as Chile is a country in Antarctica and will remain so — and ratifying the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, which I invite all countries to sign. I also ask countries to support Chile’s nomination of Valparaíso, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, as the headquarters of the secretariat of the treaty I just mentioned.
Given the magnitude of the challenges, isolated efforts are useless. We need everyone, in particular the major Powers and those who benefited from the indiscriminate exploitation of the planet’s natural resources for decades, to take responsibility and support those who are currently lagging behind — with resources, not just good intentions. We cannot forget that many of today’s developed countries are so because they have plundered with impunity the wealth of other peoples for too long.
There are many challenges, but fate is not written or inevitable. That is why I am hopeful and optimistic about our shared future. It is up to us to build a more just and dignified world for all of the world’s inhabitants and for future generations.
A few weeks ago, Elvira Hernández became the second Chilean poet to win Chile’s National Prize for Literature, after Nobel laureate Gabriela Mistral. By way of conclusion, I would like to paraphrase a warning contained in one of her poems: “We are birds of passage, but we have become accustomed to behaving like monuments”. Let us not turn multilateralism and the United Nations system into a sterile, static monument. Let us make this great historic achievement, which emerged from the ashes of the Second World War, into robust and renewed energy in 2024 to improve the quality of life of all humankind.
