Today humankind is once again at an historical crossroads. We are facing a changing and turbulent world. Challenges of insecurity, imbalanced development and ineffective governance are increasingly prominent. Hotspot conflicts, major country confrontation and geopolitical tensions keep emerging. The future of the planet is becoming a cause for growing concern.
Meanwhile, we are also embracing a world full of hope. Multipolarity and globalization have become the unstoppable trend of our times. The aspirations of the nations of the global South to modernization have never been stronger. Our march towards modernization has never been more steadfast. This institution, the United Nations, embodies the aspirations of people across the world to lasting peace and common prosperity and bears witness to the glorious journey of the international community, coming together in pursuit of progress.
President Xi Jinping has stressed on multiple occasions that the role of the United Nations should be strengthened, not weakened. Amid global transformation not seen in a century, what China calls for is to follow the trend of the times, keep to the direction of human progress and make the right choices. What China proposes is to uphold peaceful coexistence and put in place a security architecture that ensures enduring stability; uphold openness and inclusiveness and foster a development paradigm that promotes shared prosperity; uphold harmony without uniformity and adopt an approach to civilizations that promotes exchange and mutual learning; adopt fairness and justice and develop a governance structure that pulls strings for shared benefit.
In today’s world, the security of all countries is bound together in the face of various kinds of global challenges and risks. No one can be immune or enjoy security alone. Countries need to be guided by a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should respect each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, take the legitimate security concerns of others seriously and resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should actively explore a path for major countries to coexist in peace and work for a new type of international relations characterized by mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation.
In today’s world, the development of all countries is deeply integrated. If the rich get richer while the poor remain poor, then “everyone is born equal” will become an empty slogan and fairness and justice will be even more elusive. Achieving modernization is the legitimate right of the peoples of all countries, not the prerogative of a few. We should be committed to advancing global modernization and to ensuring that no one and no country is left behind on the journey towards modernization. We should advocate a universally beneficial and inclusive economic globalization, unequivocally oppose unilateralism and protectionism and help developing countries to close the development divide so as to maintain the vitality of global economic growth.
In today’s world, each civilization has its own strengths. President Xi Jinping has pointed out that there is no such thing as a superior or inferior civilization and that civilizations differ only in identity and location. We should respect the diversity of civilizations and strive to replace estrangement and the clash of civilizations with exchanges and mutual learning. We should advocate humankind’s common values of peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom, refrain from conducting values-oriented diplomacy and oppose ideology-based confrontation. We should respect each other as equals and help each other succeed with an inclusive mind.
In today’s world, countries should all enjoy sovereign equality. As a large number of nations of the global South are growing with strong momentum, gone are the days when one or two major Powers call the shots on everything. We should advocate an equal and orderly multipolar world and ensure that all countries, regardless of their size, have their own place and role in the multipolar system. We should practice true multilateralism, oppose hegemonism and power politics and make international relations more democratic. We should follow the principle of extensive consultation and joint contribution for shared benefits and make global governance more just and equitable.
Peace is the most precious thing in our world today. We may wonder if there is a path leading to peace. In fact, peace is the path. Without peace, development will not be sustained. Without peace, cooperation cannot happen. For the sake of peace, a single ray of hope is reason enough not to give up. The slightest chance deserves a hundredfold effort.
An end to the Ukraine crisis remains elusive. The top priority is to commit to no expansion of the battlefield, no escalation of fighting and no provocation by any party, and to push for the de-escalation of the situation as soon as possible. China is committed to playing a constructive role, engaging in shuttle mediation and promoting talks for peace, and to not throwing oil on the fire or exploiting the situation for selfish gain.
At this session of the General Assembly, China, Brazil and other countries of the global South have jointly launched the Group of Friends for Peace. Its purpose is to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, build consensus for a political settlement of the crisis and contribute to the prospects for peace.
As we speak, the question of Palestine is the biggest wound to the human conscience. The conflict in Gaza is ongoing, claiming more casualties with each passing day. Fighting has started in Lebanon again, but might cannot replace justice. Palestine’s long-held aspiration to establish an independent State should not be shunned any longer and the historical injustice suffered by the Palestinian people should no longer be ignored. There must be no delay in reaching a comprehensive ceasefire and the fundamental way out lies in the two-State solution. China has always been a staunch supporter of the just cause of the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate national rights and of Palestine’s accession to full United Nations membership. We have recently helped to bring about breakthroughs in intra-Palestine reconciliation and will continue to work in concert with likeminded countries for a comprehensive and just settlement of the question of Palestine and lasting peace and stability in the Middle East.
The issue of Afghanistan concerns regional peace and security. It is important to help that country exercise prudent governance, effectively fight terrorism, improve people’s lives and reinvigorate the economy to create a better future for the people of Afghanistan.
The Korean Peninsula should not experience war again. The important thing is to make persistent efforts for de-escalation, commit to seeking solutions through dialogue and consultation, realize a transition from the armistice to a peace mechanism and safeguard peace and stability on the peninsula.
China is deeply aware that Asia needs stability and development and opposes division and conflict. As an important birthplace of human civilization and a key engine of global growth, Asia has the wisdom and capability to stabilize situations through regional cooperation and handle differences properly through dialogue and consultation. We are firmly opposed to meddling by countries outside the region and will firmly resist attempts by any force to stoke trouble and confrontation in the region.
As the world faces increasingly serious challenges, China has never opted to be an indifferent spectator. Instead, we have been playing a bigger role in global governance than ever before. President Xi Jinping has launched the Global Development Initiative, the Global Security Initiative and the Global Civilization Initiative in recent years. They embody China’s wisdom for resolving the various difficult issues confronting humankind and bring impetus from China to improving global governance.
In the face of uneven and inadequate global development, China’s proposes to put development at the top of the global agenda, focus on delivering the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, increase input in development and help developing countries better respond to different risks and challenges. At the recent Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, President Xi Jinping outlined 10 partnership actions to be taken together with Africa to advance modernization and announced the decision to give over 40 least developed countries, including those in Africa, zero tariff treatment for 100 per cent tariff lines. China is the first major developing country and the first major economy to take such a significant step.
In the face of unilateral bullying acts such as sanctions and blockade, China firmly supports countries in defending their legitimate rights, upholding the equity and openness of the international system, making global development more coordinated and beneficial for all, jointly opposing technology blockades and rejecting the decoupling or severing of supply chains. Sanctions and pressure will not bring monopolistic advantages. Suppressing and containing others will not solve problems at home. The right of people of all countries to pursue a better life should not be taken away.
We once again urged the United States to completely lift its blockade, sanctions and terrorism-related designation against Cuba.
In the face of worsening ecological challenges, China is firmly committed to the path of green, low-carbon and sustainable development. We will move from carbon peaking to carbon neutrality in the shortest time span in world history, contributing China’s efforts to harmonious coexistence between humankind and nature. At the global level, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities must be upheld and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change implemented in earnest. Developed countries should assist developing countries in developing their capacity to cope with climate change. Touting the need for a climate response while suppressing the green industries of others will only hold back global progress towards green transition.
In the face of burgeoning artificial intelligence (AI), China is committed to taking a people-centred approach, developing AI for good and putting equal emphasis on development and security. We are working to explore and establish widely recognized international rules and standards. China supports the United Nations role as the main channel for global AI governance and is committed to strengthening international cooperation on AI capacity-building. China has put forth the AI Capacity-Building Action Plan for Good and for All, and we are ready to make further contributions to the sound, orderly, fair and inclusive development of AI.
In the face of the task of protecting human rights, China maintains that the right of all countries to independently choose their path of human rights development should be respected. No country should impose its own will on others or interfere in others’ internal affairs in the name of human rights. In human rights protection, China is committed to putting people first and promoting the free and well-rounded development of peoples. We have found a path of human rights development that suits China’s national conditions. China is ready to continue dialogue and exchanges on an equal footing with all countries and United Nations human rights bodies and to jointly promote the sound development of the global human rights cause.
Taiwan is an inalienable part of China’s territory. That is the history and the reality. Both the Cairo and the Potsdam Declarations stated in explicit terms that all the territories which Japan had stolen from the Chinese, including Taiwan and the Penghu islands, should be restored to China. That constitutes an important part of the post-war international order. At its twenty-sixth session, right here in this hallowed Hall 53 years ago, the General Assembly adopted resolution 2758 (XXVI) by an overwhelming majority, deciding to restore all the rights of the People’s Republic of China at the United Nations, recognize the representatives of. Government of the People’s Republic of China as the only legitimate representatives of China to the United Nations and immediately expel the representatives of the Taiwan region from the United Nations and all the organizations related to it. The resolution resolved once and for all the issue of the representation of the whole of China, including Taiwan, in the United Nations. It made clear that there is no such thing as two Chinas or one China-one Taiwan. On that matter of principle, there is no grey zone or room for ambiguity. The complete reunification of China will be achieved. Taiwan will eventually return to the embrace of the motherland. That is the overwhelming trend of history that no one and no force can stop.
In a few days’ time, the People’s Republic of China will celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of its founding. Over the past 75 years, no matter how the world has changed, China’s dedication has not changed. It is dedicated to pursuing happiness for the Chinese people and the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. It is also dedicated to human progress and world harmony. In the course of seeking its own development, China has kept in mind the common interests of the whole world, generating new opportunities for the world through its own development.
Not long ago, the third plenary session of the twentieth CPC Central Committee made an important decision on further deepening reform comprehensively to advance Chinese modernization. It has set in motion a new journey on which China will join hands with the world in common development and progress.
Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to world peace. The Chinese culture values peace and the Chinese nation has no tradition of external expansion. China, once a victim of foreign Power bullying, knows full well the value of peace and the hard-won gains of development. In fact, China is the only major country that has written peaceful development into its Constitution and the only country among the five nuclear-weapon States to pledge no first use of nuclear weapons. We are actively exploring and putting into practice the Chinese way of addressing hotspot issues, boosting the prospects for resolving the security dilemma, improving security governance and paving the ground for conflict-settlement and peacebuilding. Every step in China’s development is an increase in the force for peace.
Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to common development for all. China cares about more than its own development; we are ready to develop hand-in-hand with all countries. By further expanding high-standard opening up, China is aligning proactively with high-standard international economic and trade rules to foster a market-oriented, law-based and world-class business environment. China has realized full mutual visa exemption with many countries and is expanding its unilateral visa waiver programme to facilitate two-way personnel flows. China is vigorously promoting high quality Belt and Road cooperation, a concrete step in support of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. China will also speed up the implementation of the eight measures in support of global South cooperation in a series of initiatives supporting Africa’s peace and development, in order to help countries of the global South stride towards modernization.
Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to improving global governance. China has been an abiding supporter of the United Nations continued reform and development to bring about a modernized United Nations 2.0. The international financial system needs to be more fit for the times and global governance should be more balanced and effective. China will continue to fulfil its international obligations, provide financial support and send our best minds to the United Nations. The United Nations system needs to respond to the legitimate cause of developing countries and increase the representation and voice of those in the global South. Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to the advancement of human civilization.
Chinese modernization is rooted in China but has also drawn on the achievements of other civilizations. It has created a new form of human advancement and provided a new choice to other countries in exploring modernization paths. China urges different civilizations to respect and learn from each other in order to jointly advance the cause of human civilization. China has proposed the setting up of an international day for dialogue among civilizations. We call for more people-to-people exchanges and cooperation across the world to promote understanding and amity among people around.
Next year, the world will mark the eightieth anniversary of the victory of the world anti-fascist war and the founding of this very Organization. China stands ready to work with all countries to renew the founding purposes and mission of the United Nations, reaffirm our steadfast commitment to the United Nations Charter, advocate and practice true multilateralism, build a community with a shared future for mankind and jointly usher in a better world.
