On behalf of His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, I would like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on the quality and depth of the debates at this session and on the remarkable success of the Summit of the Future.
Our general debate is taking place in a worrisome global context in terms of security, economics and politics, that urges our nations to take collective action. With that in mind, my country welcomes the appropriate choice of theme for this session, which invites our States to look in the same direction, in order to build a safer and more united world.
The world is at a crossroads, with geopolitical tensions multiplying and fuelling the escalation of several armed conflicts. Violent confrontations in sensitive regions are bringing them to the brink of widespread conflagration. That situation of insecurity and declining peace is exacerbated by terrorism in regions such as the Sahel. Those conflicts are gradually wiping out years of progress and development for the people.
This is an opportunity for my country to call on the international community to mobilize in support of the people of the Sahel, who are paying a heavy price in the war against terrorist groups. True to its values and its tradition of hospitality, Côte d’Ivoire is hosting, in the best possible conditions, several thousand nationals from neighbouring Sahelian countries who are fleeing the violence of armed groups. Beyond the Sahel, the whole of West Africa is now threatened with collapse.
That trend could spread beyond the African continent if no effective measures are taken. For its part, Côte d’Ivoire is making the Jacqueville International Counter-Terrorism Academy available to all countries to help them to build their capacity to combat terrorism in all its forms.
The progress made by our country on development and human security is now being undermined by the effects of climate change, which are exacerbating inequalities and poverty and leading to the forced displacement of millions of people every year. The relentless increase in the number of climate refugees constitutes a tragedy of our time that concerns us all. Against that backdrop, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the United Nations and all its partners to increase and intensify their emergency humanitarian assistance to those hard-hit populations. However, we must go farther on the climate issue and resolutely adopt measures that will enable us to reverse, in the short term, our planet’s dangerous global warming curve and its consequences for our societies. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call on developed countries to honour their commitments in terms of climate financing and support for the energy transition. The loss and damage fund must be rapidly replenished and put to good use to relieve climate-distressed populations.
In addition to facing security and climate challenges, the world is being shaped by a technological revolution for which few countries are prepared. Artificial intelligence holds great promise for our societies, but it can also pose a number of threats and lead to abuses, owing to the lack of international regulations governing its use. Consequently, it is incumbent upon us to ensure that that revolution does not exacerbate inequalities or lead to the digital disadvantage of part of humankind, but that, on the contrary, it promotes the progress and well-being of all. It is for that reason that my country welcomes the adoption of the Global Digital Compact (see resolution 79/1), which should enable better use of that technological advance, in the service of the progress of all nations.
Clearly, no single country can enable the world to overcome the global challenges that are undermining the foundations of peace and security and the social progress achieved over recent decades. In view of that reality, our collective action must be firmly rooted in the unique multilateral framework of the United Nations. The world truly needs a dynamic and effective United Nations Organization that is representative of the diversity of peoples and backed by the consensus of nations that underpins its legitimacy. In that context, the United Nations, inherited from the twentieth century, must be thoroughly reformed in order to fully play its role in today’s multipolar world. The Security Council, in particular, must open up to Africa in all categories of membership in order to reflect that reality.
It is on that condition that our global Organization will be able to make a genuine contribution to the lasting settlement of conflicts, on the basis of respect for international law, which remains its foundation. The same applies to the fight against global warming, which hinges on our shared Organization’s ability to rally Member States around that priority and to get/induce them to uphold the commitments that they have undertaken in that regard. The reform of global governance must also extend to the multilateral financial institutions so that they provide greater support to efforts to finance the achievement by developing countries of the Sustainable Development Goals while also addressing the issue of debt. Those institutions must be more inclusive in the way they operate and make decisions.
Those far-reaching changes are inevitable and must be sped up, so that the institutions are truly at the service of all our countries, at the service of our fight against poverty and of our development efforts. I would like to take this opportunity to salute the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his courageous preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and peacebuilding initiatives and also for his commitment to reforming global financial governance. Collectively, we have the tools to meet the challenges that are disrupting the world and to give our youth and women the means to flourish and contribute, more so than they have in the past, to the development of our countries. The future of Africa lies with its young people, and we have an obligation to build competitive education and training systems for them, in addition to democratic institutions that protect their freedoms.
My country firmly believes in the virtues of multilateralism, which we place at the heart of our interactions with other nations. That is how, together, our States will be able to overcome major divisions, build consensus around difficult issues and promote global solutions to the world’s major challenges. It is that vision that informs our actions on community-building at the regional level and our contribution alongside other countries to building a peaceful, united and prosperous world for the benefit of present and future generations.
