I am honoured to deliver before the Assembly the full address that Mr. Paul Biya, President of the Republic of Cameroon and Head of State, has authorized me to deliver on his behalf.
“At the outset, I would again like to offer you, Sir, my warm congratulations
on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. Your accession to that high position is the pride of your country, Cameroon, and Africa and has been welcomed by the international community. I convey our full gratitude to the Member States that supported your candidacy for election, especially those from Africa that unanimously nominated you as the candidate of our continent.
“I salute the work and achievements of your predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, who was able to lead with commitment the work of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
“I also take this opportunity to reiterate Cameroon’s support and appreciation for Secretary-General António Guterres, who, despite the many contingencies our world is facing at this time, is relentlessly engaged in the advancement of the ideals, goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the influence of our common Organization.
“Mr. President, you have chosen to place at the heart of this seventy-ninth general debate the theme ‘Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations’. The theme, it must be emphasized, reflects the imperative and urgent need for joint action in an international environment that is difficult and complex in terms of challenges and opportunities alike. Among those challenges, it is necessary to note that our common home, planet Earth, is the victim of an extreme climatic disruption that threatens the physical survival of certain countries, forests and coastal areas in different regions of the world.
“The torrential rains and subsequent devastating floods we have seen in recent months in Africa, Europe and Asia, heat waves and landslides are the most visible manifestations, with some countries suffering more than others. Today climate-displaced people are now as numerous as refugees and people internally displaced by war. This is no longer a simple view of mind, but a painful daily reality for many.
“Yet we have agreed on a set of measures to combat those scourges in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and many other subsequent commitments. Cameroon, which is a State party to the Agreement and belongs to the great forest massif of the Congo basin, is sparing no effort in its search for relevant solutions, in consultation with the riparian countries, to the current global climate crisis. It is therefore launching an urgent call for the measures that were jointly adopted in the Paris Agreement to be effectively implemented, without obstacle and without delay. Unfortunately, the financial and technological resources that represent the main resources for implementing the Agreement have so far been mobilized in a parsimonious manner.
“The climate crisis has been compounded by conflicts and hotbeds of tension, old and new, that spare no geographical region. The Sahel, the Sudan, Gaza, Lebanon and Ukraine are the most illustrative examples of that. The situation is fuelling the arms race, including in outer space and in the seas and oceans. It is also fuelling an increasing use of light weapons and weapons of mass destruction. It constitutes a strong threat of the use of nuclear weapons. It also causes geopolitical tensions, rivalries of all kinds and distrust among States, which pose a threat to international peace, security and stability. If nothing is done as soon as possible, we could in the near future be forced to live through yet another dark period in the history of humankind, similar to that of the earlier twentieth century.
“For Cameroon, it is important to reverse that trend as soon as possible. We must do so to free ourselves from war and its scourges in order to safeguard future generations with regard to the ideals defended by the founding fathers of the United Nations. My country remains convinced that the use of dialogue, consultation, consensus and preventive diplomacy and the establishment of confidence-building measures must always prevail in order to guarantee lasting peace in our world.
“To that end, we must reform the Security Council in order to ensure that it continues to fully fulfil its original mandate as the principal organ for the maintenance of international peace and security. Since Africa remains to date the only continent without a permanent member on the Council, it is imperative and urgent that this injustice be corrected and that our continent rightly enjoy equitable representation as a member of that important organ in its own right. That will require the granting of two permanent seats with veto rights and two additional non-permanent seats.
“When we adopted resolution 66/288, entitled ‘The Future we want’, and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we wanted to engage in a decisive battle against underdevelopment. Four years ago, during the celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we made new commitments, reaffirming that the Sustainable Development Goals were our action plan, the implementation of which was a question of survival. As we close in on the 2030 deadline that we have set for ourselves, it is reasonable to note that the hoped-for results are far from being achieved, as attested by various progress reports presented by the Secretary-General.
“As I noted earlier in the case of the Paris Agreement, adopted with a view to safeguarding the planet, the financial and technological means of implementation have not been fully mobilized. Cameroon therefore calls for renewed political will and more decisive action to reverse the situation. We believe that the Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries; the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS; the agreement to be adopted at the third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, to be held in Gaborone in December; the African Union Agenda 2063, with its second decade of priorities; and the African Continental Free Trade Area are frameworks for guidance and incentives for the development of the poorest countries that must be actively implemented if we hope to leave no one behind. On that subject, Cameroon has undertaken a number of structuring projects in the fields of energy, transport, communication and telecommunications infrastructure, extractive and processing industries, and many other sectors, aimed at its emergence by 2035.
“Plans, projects and programmes for recovery and reconstruction, as well as humanitarian actions, have been set up by our Government to meet the special and pressing needs of our populations, especially those in rural areas and those affected by the terrorist sect Boko Haram in the Far North and those resulting from the sociopolitical crisis in the Far North, Northwest and Southwest regions. I take this opportunity to sincerely and strongly thank our bilateral and multilateral partners for their ongoing support for our national agenda of progress and development and invite them to continue to honour us with their loyal support.
“No action taken by developing countries can produce the desired results unless the global macroeconomic framework is reformed. It must be recalled that this framework is based on institutions that have been in place since the Second World War and have become obsolete. Their structure and organization are largely at the heart of the disruptions, imbalances, dysfunctions and even inequalities that continue to hinder the full development of poor countries and the global South. Cameroon therefore joins the call and mobilization aimed at the reform of the international economic and financial architecture. That call and
mobilization relate in particular to the improved representation of developing countries in those institutions, a more equitable taxation, an appropriate monetary policy, a more sustainable debt, a better adapted energy transition, a healthy agriculture, a controlled industrialization and decent work.
“We welcomed the holding here on 22 and 23 September of the Summit of
the Future, in which we took part, and especially the adoption of the Pact for the Future and its two annexes, the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1). The Pact commits us once again to an active search for peace, sustainable development and human dignity, thanks to a series of concrete actions that require significant means of implementation. We cannot shirk those actions, which can pave the way to the future we want in the framework of reinvigorated multilateralism, supported by the ideals, goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
“The issue here is about the safeguarding of the planet, the building of
peace and the establishment of sustainable development that ensures, first and foremost, the eradication of poverty, shared prosperity and full respect for human rights centred on human dignity. In the absence of strong political resolve and the means for the active implementation of the provisions agreed to in the Pact and its annexes, we risk not achieving the desired results and, in so doing, letting down our present and future generations.
“At this point, I call once again for all-out mobilization in order to resolutely
implement those provisions and prove wrong the sceptics who have lost all hope in the United Nations. As our shared Organization prepares to celebrate its eightieth anniversary, let us give it the means to modernize itself, to respond effectively to the expectations placed in it, to meet the challenges of the time and to keep burning the flame of more humanistic international cooperation.
“We are living in a period not only of threats and challenges to peace
and development, but also of great opportunities. We have at our disposal the necessary means thanks to the prodigious growth of science, technology and artificial intelligence. It is therefore up to us to overcome selfishness and act in solidarity with a sense of collective responsibility to meet together the challenges that no country can face alone. It is up to us to use those means wisely to ensure our well-being and the survival of the planet and the human species, today and tomorrow, within the framework of tireless vigilance, enlightened awareness and in-depth reflection on the part of the international community on controlled globalization.”
