It is with great honour that I address the General Assembly today for the first time since the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo renewed their confidence in me by electing me for a second term at the head of our nation. Having had the opportunity to speak here in the past, I am particularly moved to be able to do so again at this significant moment for our country.
I would like to congratulate Mr. Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, just as I pay tribute to his predecessors for their constant commitment to the service of this institution.
The theme of this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, resonates in particular with our aspirations in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Multilateralism and respect for a rules-based global system have been essential pillars in supporting peace, security, health and prosperity around the world for nearly 80 years. The United Nations embodies those fundamental values and remains a key player in addressing the major challenges facing humankind, from ensuring security to bringing climate change under control and fighting poverty. That reality calls for enhanced multilateral cooperation. However, the noble ideal of the drafters of the Charter of the United Nations — that of serving as an instrument through which all countries regulate their behaviour — seems to be fading. The foundation of collective security that it established is wavering. We have a responsibility to work together and to reaffirm our commitment to multilateralism, which is the key to truly transformative solutions to the challenges facing our world. As former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld — whose sacrifice for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo reminds us of the gravity of our mission — so eloquently put it, “the United Nations was not created in order to bring us to heaven, but in order to save us from hell”. At this critical juncture, multilateralism is of crucial importance. It helps to respond to common threats, protect our planet and strengthen civil society and human rights.
Indeed, we cannot ignore the alarming rise in belligerent rhetoric and the indecent re-establishment of the practices of armed aggression and plundering of natural resources affecting all continents. The ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine that continues to affect the region is just one of the many manifestations threatening world peace. Yemen, the Sudan, Syria and the terrible tragedy taking place in the Gaza Strip are among the numerous contexts in which multilateralism would play its full role. It is imperative that we act together to take steps towards peace, sustainable development and human dignity, thereby ensuring a better future for future generations. Let us leave no one behind.
That is the clear and relevant message that inspires the theme selected to guide the work of the Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) and its annexes — the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations — which we adopted at the recent Summit for the Future, underscore the importance of active collaboration to achieve a common vision of a peaceful and prosperous future. Those documents represent a key commitment to ending conflicts, fighting extreme poverty and hunger and addressing such challenges as displacement, illegal immigration, food insecurity, pandemics and the risks of new technologies. At the same time, the Global Digital Compact stands as an essential pillar in our quest for a prosperous future, at the heart of the fourth industrial revolution, where digital technologies have become essential. That digital transformation represents an unprecedented opportunity to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, in particular for the least developed countries. It is aimed at reducing the digital divide and integrating unconnected populations into digital services with a high social impact.
However, to meet that major challenge, inherent to the digital revolution, comprehensive reforms are needed, involving a reassessment of the international financial architecture and adequate financing. That is why the Democratic Republic of the Congo aspires to attract investment to develop connectivity in Africa and calls for cooperation from multilateral partners and telecommunications operators, with knowledge transfer being key. Indeed, support for the grid development process in our country is a promising solution to link the south and north of Africa and also to link the Indian Ocean to the Atlantic Ocean. That includes the establishment of viable partnerships as part of the Grand Inga Hydropower Project that seeks to respond to our country’s growing energy demand, which has been compounded by the proliferation of connected devices.
Furthermore, it is essential to enhance the traceability of strategic minerals, which are an indispensable component of technological equipment, in order to ensure the responsible and sustainable exploitation of our resources. In addition, the full participation and commitment of youth, both boys and girls, are crucial to build a sustainable and inclusive society. That principle is the foundation of the Declaration on Future Generations (see resolution 79/1), underscoring our responsibility vis-à-vis future generations and the importance of making decisions that enable them to flourish. For Africa, youth is a major asset for Africa’s future prosperity. Investing in education, particularly in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, and creating environments conducive to innovation are crucial. It is essential to address the disconnect between a rapidly growing youth population and the job market by providing the skills that they require to join the job market.
The situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is particularly concerning. The resurgence of the Mouvement du 23 mars terrorist group, supported by Rwanda, has caused an unprecedented humanitarian crisis, with almost 7 million internally displaced persons. That aggression constitutes a major violation of our national sovereignty. We call upon the international community to firmly condemn those actions and to impose targeted sanctions against Rwanda for its destabilizing and damaging role. We demand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Rwandan troops from our territory. While recent diplomatic initiatives, such as the Luanda talks, may be encouraging, they must in no way obscure the urgency of that essential action.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is actively working to establish lasting peace in the east of the country and to promote the economic development and social well-being of the communities devastated by this armed conflict. Nevertheless, we are not closing any door to any opportunity that would bring about that peace without compromising its sovereignty, let alone its territorial integrity. In that regard, we are resolutely committed to implementing the road map adopted as part of the Luanda process, which I firmly support and which promotes high-level dialogue with the aim of re-establishing trust between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda while minimizing the risk of the current security crisis devolving into a regional conflict. Moreover, my country remains open to any other initiative by our partners that would contribute to achieving this noble goal of peace.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo reaffirms its determination to ensure lasting peace. Under my leadership, we are determined to pursue the implementation of the National Programme for Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Reinsertion and Stabilization, which is a key part of our national strategy to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate combatants by providing them with viable and sustainable economic opportunities, while also stabilizing the regions affected by conflict. By ensuring the transition from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are also prioritizing the repatriation of foreign combatants. The National Programme is a crucial tool for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I invite our partners and friends to support it.
Further, thousands of victims of the genocide for economic gain in the Democratic Republic of the Congo — the genocost for short — continue to endure the devastating consequences of a past marked by violence and impunity. Recognizing and addressing the effects of that tragedy is crucial to promote the recovery and reconstruction of the affected communities. Beyond immediate humanitarian aid, a long-term approach focused on justice, reconciliation and sustainable development is vital in order to enable the victims to recover and to return to a decent life. That is why the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo decided to declare 2 August Genocost Day, which is dedicated to the victims of the heinous crimes perpetrated by rebels with the support of multinational corporations and States in the region. It is a day on which we come together as a nation, and it allows us to confront our painful past so that we can move forward. It is essential to strengthening the historical conscience of our country and to affirm our nation’s determination to prevent such barbarous acts from happening again.
Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace and security, and it affects all regions of the world. Having raged in Asia, in Western Europe and in North America, this scourge now seems to be entrenching itself in Africa. As a member of the international counter-Da’esh coalition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo urges the United Nations to ramp up its efforts to implement that organization’s recommendations, particularly with regard to the Aqabah process. Terrorism, which is raging in the east of our country, is closely linked to the looting and illegal exploitation of our natural resources. Those criminal activities are fuelling insecurity and financing armed groups, exacerbating conflicts in the Great Lakes region. The United Nations must therefore consider imposing severe sanctions against the persons responsible for those economic crimes in order to break that vicious cycle and to foster peace, sustainable development and human dignity for future generations.
According to the most recent voluntary national review report on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the Democratic Republic of the Congo has made significant progress towards several of the SDG targets thanks to major reforms and interventions. Since 2019, the Government has implemented ambitious reforms to ensure free basic education, enabling more than 4 million children to attend school. Moreover, several measures have been adopted to strengthen social protection, to introduce universal health coverage, to promote gender equality and to foster the development of infrastructure and rapid industrialization via, inter alia, the establishment of special economic zones. Despite that progress, the global report on the Sustainable Development Goals underscores that at the current rate, the Democratic Republic of the Congo will not be able to achieve the SDGs by 2030, owing to persistent inequality and vulnerabilities, which are exacerbated by armed conflict.
In response to that challenge, a road map consisting of specific measures, initiatives and reforms has been drawn up to expedite progress and to respond to the issues contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Some measures have already been put in place to bring the Democratic Republic of the Congo into line with the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. If that is to be achieved, the Democratic Republic of the Congo will need an annual investment of $32 billion. It is therefore essential to strengthen partnerships for sustainable investment and to promote peace so as to foster stable socioeconomic development.
When it comes to the global response to the climate challenge and the promotion of renewable energy sources, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has already stated its commitment to ambitious action on climate, would underscore how crucial increased financial and technical support is to consolidating its efforts towards achieving the objectives of the Paris Agreement. With its wealth of biodiversity and natural resources, the Democratic Republic of the Congo sees itself as a key player in the fight against climate change. Initiatives undertaken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are focused on four strategic sectors: agriculture, forestry, energy and waste management. Structural reforms are being introduced to reverse deforestation and to improve access to clean energy. They reflect the Government’s firm commitment to preserving natural resources and a green transition.
When it comes to placing the focus on tropical forests, a major milestone was reached in Bali, Indonesia, in November 2022 with the adoption of the joint statement on cooperation on tropical forests and climate action, signed by Brazil, Indonesia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That stride forward reflects a collective political will to use forests as a springboard for sustainable development. The trilateral alliance for cooperation on tropical forests established on that occasion will provide a framework for tackling biodiversity issues and will offer solutions for the carbon credit markets, while ensuring that the rights of indigenous peoples are upheld.
Also, on the subject of challenges related to the environment and global warming, the second summit that the world’s three main tropical forest basins — the Amazon, the Congo and the Borneo-Mekong basins — held from 26 to 28 October 2023 in Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo, must be highlighted. That African initiative, spearheaded by President Denis Sassou Nguesso, is aimed at establishing, within the framework of the United Nations Decade on the Ecosystem Restoration, the first global coalition dedicated to restoring 350 million hectares of land-based and aquatic ecosystems. Those forests form a vital defence against climate change. Given that the problems have been clearly identified and that solutions are within reach, it is crucial to take concrete action. The Amazon, Congolese and Borneo-Mekong basins are home to more than 80 per cent of tropical forests and play a crucial role in combating climate change, while providing vital ecosystem services. Improving the socioeconomic conditions of local communities, who play a key role in preserving the forests, must therefore be placed at the top of global governance priorities. For its part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is introducing legal instruments and institutional arrangements to strengthen its position in the global carbon market. At the same time, it is open to partnerships that are in line with the Paris Agreement and its domestic legislation.
Growing awareness of the challenges posed by an unstable climate and the depletion of natural resources, which are often the root cause of armed conflict, underlines the urgent need to tackle those issues. Acknowledging the nexus between climate change, environmental degradation and security is therefore paramount to encouraging proactive action that mitigates those risks through sustainable practices. In that vein, we urge the Security Council to establish international mechanisms that incorporate climate security issues into its discussions.
The world is facing a major energy challenge. Fossil fuel-based systems are responsible for significant greenhouse gas emissions, exacerbating climate change. Without concerted efforts to promote renewable energies and, as we are already seeing, it is likely that the serious crises facing us, such as extreme weather conditions and conflicts over natural resources, will become more frequent. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has a wealth of resources, including essential minerals —cobalt, lithium, nickel and graphite, to name but a few — which can help pave the way for a sustainable energy transition. We are appealing for international cooperation in developing the necessary technologies and infrastructure. Our vision consists of making the utilization of our resources a springboard for sustainable and inclusive development, while improving education, health and infrastructure. Social inclusion is central to our strategy so as that the benefits of progress are distributed fairly. By investing in the fight against climate change and contributing to the Sustainable Development Goals, the Democratic Republic of the Congo stands ready to play a key role in transforming the world’s energy systems. Together, we can build a future in which energy is clean, sustainable and accessible to all.
I would also like to address the crucial issue of gender equality. Although the equal participation of women and men in the political sphere has garnered international acceptance, there is, in practice, a persistent gap when it comes to equality before the law and the actual wielding of power. Women’s concerns deserve to be factored into the major decisions affecting our society. In the Democratic Republic of Congo, we are determined to change mindsets so as to overcome the societal barriers to women fulfilling their potential. Involving men in that process is paramount so that the social dynamics are transformed and men having a role in women’s success is seen as positive. The Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo enshrines equality at a national level. Furthermore, the Government has introduced a strategy to combat gender-based violence, focusing on prevention, protection and reparations for victims. That strategy is reflected in the National Fund for Reparations for Victims of Conflict-related Sexual Violence and Crimes against Peace and the Security of Humankind. Draft legislation is aimed at guaranteeing that protection. It is worth highlighting the significant progress made in terms of women’s participation in decision-making, with the appointment, for the first time in our history, of a woman to serve as Prime Minister and Head of Government. We are also seeing greater representation of women in Government bodies, Parliament and the judicial system. The appointment of a woman to the office of First President of the Council of State and a woman to head the Central Bank of the Congo are a case in point.
As part of that drive for progress, it is imperative that the international community, under the aegis of the United Nations, continue to support those dynamics by reinventing itself in the face of the challenges of today’s world. To maintain the confidence of the international community, the United Nations must demonstrate its ability to adapt to contemporary developments and to overcome them effectively and responsibly. We must reinvigorate multilateralism through targeted reform of the Charter of the United Nations, addressing key issues, such as the Security Council, the right of the veto, Chapter VII and the use of force. However, that will not be enough. Coordination and cooperation among the various United Nations institutions and agencies must also be strengthened. Many global issues are often addressed redundantly in different forums, sometimes from contradictory angles, while other issues are neglected entirely, with each international bureaucracy seeking to defend its own existence.
In that regard, while I welcome the support of the United States, I firmly reiterate, on behalf of all African countries, the call for two permanent seats to be created on the Security Council for African countries. As the main decision-maker within the United Nations, the Council must include African representatives among its permanent members with all the related prerogatives, including the right of veto, so as to guarantee fair geographical representation. It is a matter of justice for a continent whose role in international affairs is becoming increasingly prominent. We Africans are meeting that demand with the utmost determination.
Lastly, I cannot conclude without recalling that, after more than three decades of absence from the Security Council, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, backed by the African Union and the Southern African Development Community, has once again submitted its candidacy for the post of non-permanent member for the period 2026–2027 in the elections that are to be held in New York in June 2025. The Democratic Republic of the Congo held that position for the periods 1982–1983 and 1990–1991, when it worked to promote peace, security and stability in Africa and the world. If elected, the Democratic Republic of the Congo intends to play a proactive role in the Security Council, helping to revitalize the Charter of the United Nations and contributing constructively to the resulting debates and actions. My country therefore seeks the support of all Member States for its election.
At a time when multilateralism is being put to the test, the Democratic Republic of the Congo reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the international community and stands ready to assume with honour and responsibility the mission of forging a future in which cooperation and peace prevail over conflict and division. Nelson Mandela said that “none of us acting alone can achieve success”. We therefore call on all Member States — long-standing partners and new allies — to come together to write this crucial chapter in our collective history. Together, let us make our world a place where every nation, large or small, can thrive in dignity and security.
