I would like at the outset to express my great admiration for Mr. Philemon Yang, a person of great renown on the African continent, brilliantly elected to the presidency of our Assembly and whom we have seen lead our debates with great dexterity.
As most speakers have said from this rostrum, our world is indeed at a crossroads. It is facing a sort of fatal spiral of interlocking crises and dangerous conflicts that one might almost believe to be irreconcilable. Indeed, situations of war or armed violence of all kinds in Ukraine, Palestine, Lebanon, the Sudan, the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — situations whose list is unfortunately not exhaustive and to which we must add the climate crisis, the unsustainable debt burden and, of course, the apocalyptic spectre of a nuclear war — are all existential challenges that today challenge what remains of human wisdom and call into question what remains of our awareness of good and evil.
All those situations — as every one of us in the Hall is well aware — are largely revealing as tributaries to human vanity. They are the faithful reflection of the irrepressible propensity of some of us to dominate absolutely and to possess absolutely. They are a pernicious vice that certainly has its roots in the genesis of humankind, but which we have still not managed to eradicate.
From this rostrum, in the name of peace, I call for a recovery on the part of all those who exercise political power throughout the world.
In the name of peace, I call for the collective wisdom, the cardinal virtue, that the ancients lavished on all our societies in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Americas and the Pacific.
In the name of peace, I call for full awareness of the fact that we are only one human race, embarked on the same ship, linked by a community of destiny and bound by reciprocal obligations and shared duties.
I call quite simply for universal fraternity, that generous utopia, sublimated in the time of the Enlightenment and which in 1948 nourished the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which became the credo of all humanists.
Our world vitally needs to reconnect with peace; if it does not, it is heading straight for its doom. Peace is not an option. It cannot be an alternative. Peace is an imperative, and that imperative must be imposed on everyone, everywhere and in all places.
It is precisely that imperative of peace that today drives the mediation efforts of the African Union in Libya, a country where President Denis Sassou Nguesso, on whose behalf I speak, has been working tirelessly for years for comprehensive peace and inclusive reconciliation. Through perseverance and indomitability, the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya, which he chairs, has managed to bring yesterday’s enemy brothers together around the same table. The Committee has encouraged them to talk to each other. It has encouraged them to forgive each other and persuaded them to give precedence to justice, the foundation of the rule of law to which Libya aspires, rising from its ashes like the invincible phoenix. That peace, stubbornly sought and patiently cultivated for years, should soon materialize in Addis Ababa through the solemn signing by all parties of a charter of reconciliation. Thus, the path leading to the long-awaited general, free and democratic elections will be largely marked out.
The renewal of multilateralism underlying the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) that we have just adopted clearly involves the affirmation of a multipolar world, a paragon of the diversity of cultural expressions. It involves a just, stable and equitable world, where all the peoples of the world live together, without any distinction as to race, tradition or religion.
There is therefore an urgent need to reform the international institutions that arose from the Second World War, starting with the Security Council, which must embrace the face of our cosmopolitan world through a fairer representation of peoples. I recall Africa’s legitimate plea for two seats in the permanent membership category in the Council, with veto power. In that regard, my country reaffirms the centrality and immutability of the Common African Position, as set out in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
The time has come for Africa to take its rightful place in the concert of nations. It is up to us, representatives of the allied nations here, to make the choice of honour. It is up to us to enter history through the front door by distancing ourselves forever from medieval prejudices and abstruse stereotypes about Africa. It is up to us to consolidate and amplify our generous convergences, which trace the true paths of human history.
There will be no sustainable development on any continent if our planet is not protected from the destructive factors of the environment. Climate change is today an existential threat. That threat, as we know, is multidimensional — rising temperatures, melting glaciers, catastrophic floods, widespread desertification, the destruction of biodiversity, the outbreak of epidemics and the exodus of populations that all this entails are the perfect illustration of the fragility that now characterizes our beautiful blue planet.
The community of nations has little choice but to act, to act here and now and to act without hesitation, with rigour and responsibility in order to spare our world an irreparable cataclysmic upheaval. One of the axes of that action is of course the mindful afforestation and widespread reforestation of the planet. Each party must do its part in the building. The Republic of the Congo and the African Union came to this seventy-ninth session with a well-developed strategy, which my delegation has already included in the roster of upcoming committee work as a draft resolution. That strategy, for which I seek the advance support of our Assembly, is aimed at a substantial, progressive and irreversible increase in the world’s forest area through international cooperation that harmoniously pools afforestation and reforestation activities across the globe in a united, coordinated, concerted and consensual approach among States.
I cannot leave this rostrum without returning to a situation that constantly challenges our conscience, a situation in the face of which, morally, we cannot give up. It is the everlasting blockade inflicted on Cuba, whose duration is gradually moving towards a century and which causes untold suffering to the innocent populations of that country. The blockade, which many Americans themselves find anachronistic, should have been purely and simply abolished a long time ago. Once again, I appeal to the wisdom of the American people and the sagacity of its leaders, most of whom, as we know, have nothing to do with that sort of residual avatar of the Cold War. I urge the United States Government to turn forever that painful page in the history of the two peoples, both born of the mixed race and the blessed cultural osmosis among Europe, Africa and pre-Columbian America.
In conclusion, I hope to see all the peoples of the world resolutely engage in the fight for the emergence of a new humanity: a peaceful humanity that definitively turns its back on war and death and pools its solidarity; an authentic humanity that mercilessly fights the endemic poverty that wreaks so much havoc in developing countries, that is a real cancer in our global society and that is one of the main causes of the frustrations and violence which so obscure the horizon of hope; a fraternal humanity, as imagined in this same city by the great artist John Lennon; and finally, a rainbow humanity, as dreamed of, from the depths of his prison, by Nelson Mandela.
