My daughter Antonella Petro Urrego just sent me a paragraph that she would like me to begin my statement with. With the Assembly’s indulgence, I will read it out. The following words were written by a girl in her sixteenth year,
“Today I am proud to stand before you as the President of the heart of the
Earth. That is what our Indigenous Peoples of the Sierra Nevada called my beautiful country. Geographically speaking, it makes sense that we are the heart of the world. However, if we are the heart, we must set the example in terms of unity, total peace and the preservation of nature. If the heart functions, that is a great step forward. Nevertheless, all the other parts of the body are important — if one of them fails, the rest will fail as well. That is why, as the heart of the Earth, we call on all countries to act in good conscience, discard the greed that is killing humankind and Mother Earth and take a step towards total peace.”
So far, I have complied with my daughter’s request and will continue to do so. In this Hall, the ability of a President to communicate depends on the amount of dollars in their budget, the number of war planes they have and, at the end of the day, the ability of their country to destroy humankind. The power of a country in the world is no longer reflected by its influence in terms of the economic or political systems or ideas that it propagates but by the power to kill off humankind. Those of us who do not possess such destructive power and on the contrary have the power to sustain life on the planet are more or less ignored and may most often be heard only by our own people. That is why they do not listen to us when we vote to stop the genocide in Gaza, although we are the majority of the Presidents in the world and represent the greater part of humankind. The minority of Presidents — the minority of Presidents who could destroy humankind and who could stop the bombing — do not listen to us. If we ask for debt to be exchanged for climate action, the powerful minorities do not listen to us. If we ask to stop the wars so that we can concentrate on the rapid transformation of the world’s economy in order to preserve life and save the human species, we are not heard either. It is the power to destroy life that provides for a forceful voice at the United Nations and garners the majority of representatives. The voice of the people is not heard, and we ask that we unite in our efforts for the sake of our existence.
Here, we speak but we are not heard. However, perhaps we no longer speak to be listened to and to converse with the Presidents of world power but so that the peoples of the world will listen. Today things are worse than one year ago; 11 million hectares have been burned in the Amazon rainforest in just one month, owing to global warming and the climate crisis. Scientists have said that if the Amazon rainforest were to be consumed by fire, we would reach the point of no return in terms of climate change, whereby human decisions to stop the catastrophe would be ineffective. Well, the Amazon rainforest is burning. The bells are already tolling for the whole planet, for everyone, for us, for life and for humankind, as Ernest Hemingway said. The bells are tolling not only for all of us but for all life. It is the beginning of the end.
A year ago, I called for a peace conference for Palestine in this very Hall (see A/78/PV.4), before the first bomb exploded. As of today, we have seen 20,000 children killed by the bombs, while the Presidents of the countries with the power to destroy human life laugh in the corridors, aided by the public relations power provided by the world media, which today are owned by big capital, which is changing the world order in the absence of democracy and freedom. Humankind’s experiment in democracy, together with life, is dying, while the racists and supremacists, who believe stupidly that the Aryans are the superior race, are preparing to dominate the world by bombing people. Control over humankind through barbarism is under way, as demonstrated in Gaza and Lebanon. If Gaza perishes, so will all humanity. It turns out that God’s chosen people were not the people of Israel or the people of the United States of America. God’s chosen people are humanity in its entirety. The children of Gaza are God’s chosen people. They are humanity. They are killing the chosen people of God, humanity’s children.
There is a reason for the present-day Armageddon. There is a logic to the absurdity of the Governments that applaud genocide and do not move swiftly to shift their economies towards decarbonization. That logic is not found in the political world or at this rostrum, where all the presidents speak. That logic is found outside, and it is called social inequality. Oxfam says that the richest 1 per cent of the population has more wealth than 95 per cent of all of humankind put together. In that level of inequality that has been reached, the greatest in our history as a species — that is where we find the logic behind the massive destruction unleashed in the climate crisis and the logic behind the bombs dropped on Gaza by a criminal such as Netanyahu.
Netanyahu is a hero for the richest 1 per cent of the population, because he can show that bombs destroy people. If we measure wealth in carbon dioxide emissions rather than in dollars, we have the answer: the richest 1 per cent of the population is responsible for the evolving climate crisis and is opposed to ending the world of oil and coal because that is the source of their wealth. Politicians, including the Presidents of the most powerful countries on earth, simply obey them. They pay for the campaigns. They own the media. They are the ones who hide the truth of science, such as in the film Don’t Look Up. They are the ones who dictate what is thought, what is said and what should be prohibited and silenced. As they wield their power to prohibit and censor, they shout: “Long live freedom!”, but it is the freedom of the richest 1 per cent of the world’s population, in their mercantile and free spirit, that is leading to the destruction of the atmosphere and of life.
The free market was not freedom, as they said, but the maximization of death. The richest 1 per cent of the population, the powerful global oligarchy, is what allows bombs to be dropped on women, children and the elderly in Gaza, Lebanon and the Sudan. It is what allows the economic blockade of the rebellious countries that do not fit into their paradigm, such as Cuba or Venezuela, because they need to showcase their ability to destroy the remaining 99 per cent of the population in order to ensure that they can continue to control the world’s resources, appropriating and accumulating more and more of its wealth. The global oligarchy is leading humankind to its own extinction and politicians pay homage to it, completely abandoning the ideas of freedom, the power of the people and democracy.
The question that must be asked from this rostrum is whether the people will allow it. There is no more time. Governments are incapable of stopping the extinction of life. Today we must choose between life and greed, between humankind and capital. I can do no more than tell the peoples of the world, in the quiet voice of a country without weapons of mass destruction or dollars — but made beautiful by its natural and cultural diversity, its loveliness and its butterflies of all colours — that it is no longer the time of Governments but the time of the people. We have run out of time. Either we raise the flag of life, or our towns will be filled with cemeteries, as the pandemic has shown us. It is the time of the people, and we must act locally and agree internationally. Fossil capital cannot continue. The people must stop it. The poison emitted into the atmosphere is fatal and the chimneys that emit it must be stopped. Every corner of the world can be a battle against those chimneys.
A century ago, the working masses raised a red flag in the revolution against capital. That world is over. Lost in the gigantism of States and the absence of freedom, the red flag did not find a place in the history of humankind. But today, with a more powerful incentive — not only to defend a class or a system of ideas but to defend all of life — the raised flag is needed again. Perhaps it is no longer red but composed of all colours, a flag for all humankind in the defence of its very existence on the planet. Perhaps the word socialism today has a new meaning. Brains, which are the true basis of work, are more connected today than ever. Today human knowledge is more collective than ever.
Helping each other has always been the magic that allowed us to survive for 1 million years on this planet. Alone, individuals are vulnerable and end up in the hands of fentanyl — the drug of death and human defeat. People are strong if we help each other and if that help reaches global levels. Mutual aid, the collective building of knowledge and humanity as the new political unit provide the basis for the new meaning of socialism. We are the most advanced form of intelligent life, which must be defended, along with the other forms of life, from the global oligarchy that assaults it. A new wealth must be built — no longer based on oil but on the deep, creative and freely performed work that has made possible the high levels of productivity achieved today, including artificial intelligence, and that must be controlled by a global public authority. Productivity allows for free time and creative time and the networking of human brains, the greatest potential ever achieved. That neural network of humankind is what can allow us to win, with the flag of life raised.
I am no longer addressing Biden, Macron, Scholz, Xi Jinping or Putin. I am taking from China its idea of intercivilizational dialogue, from Europe its social compact, from the United States of America its love of original democracy and its founding fathers, from South America its passionate diversity, its flag-bearing horseriders and Simón Bolívar, from Africa its drums that call us to communicate with the spirits of nature, and from Jesus his idea of universal love and the union of light and life. We must draw on those civilizing sources and more — which belong to all the peoples of the world — to fight the greatest battle for life in human history. That battle is undoubtedly a global revolution. We need to build the greatest army of all time, made up of warriors for life. The army for life will not have the weapons of the global oligarchy. It will not have nuclear weapons or compete for weapons. Its pockets will not be full of money like those of the banks. It will not have the power to annihilate children like the genocides of the oligarchy. But it will have the greatest power of all — the power of a united humankind that will not let its existence be erased from the planet. In a universe spanning millions of light years, there is only one infinitesimally small place where life exists — the place we call Earth, with superior life forms, intelligent beings — humankind. We cannot let that treasure of the universe be destroyed. Without life, only inert darkness — the kind that fills the heart and soul of the global oligarchy and its crooked idols — would reign. It is up to humankind to fight that.
It is the hour of the peoples. Where Governments have been incapable, as we are seeing now, and have decided to engage in power plays with bombs and senseless wars and to kill boys and girls, it is time for the people themselves — humankind at its basic level — to take into its own hands the matter of resolving humankind’s biggest problems. Instead of turning to insensitive rulers, let us turn to ourselves — the common people. Let us turn to the people to carry out concerted action and demonstrate the viability of other forms of democratic power. By transforming humankind’s power into an active consciousness, we can bring about new Governments and new leaderships. If we succeed in preventing our own extinction, the global oligarchy will cease to govern the world — it will be overthrown to build a global democracy. A new chapter in history is about to begin.
