It is my honour to convey to the Assembly warm greetings from His Excellency Mr. Azali Assoumani, President of the Union of Comoros, and his wishes for every success in conducting this business of planetary importance. At the outset, allow me, on behalf of the delegation of the Comoros, to express our sincere thanks to the American authorities for the warm welcome that they have extended to us in New York, during our participation in this seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. I wish to offer my warm congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang, for his election to the presidency of the General Assembly at this seventy-ninth session and to tell him how honoured we, as Africans, feel by this presidency. I would also like to pay a well-earned tribute to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for his wise leadership and his dedication to peace and development during his presidency of the Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, whose work he steered with perfection. Lastly, on behalf of my country, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his commitment to peace and development.
This seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly commences, yet again, at a particularly critical juncture in the affairs of the international community. Since 22 February 2022, the war in Ukraine has continued to devastate two major European countries, putting the global equilibrium in peril. On behalf of the Union of the Comoros, I beseech the Russian and Ukrainian leaders to take the path of dialogue and negotiation. I appeal to them, for the sake of their peoples and their own legacies and because a ceasefire in the first instance and subsequently peace are prerequisites for easing the economic, social and food situation for the entire world and for Africa in particular, which is suffering so greatly from the conflict.
When it comes to Palestine, the facts of daily life leave us in no doubt that self-defence is not the goal. The war, marked by a disproportion in forces and the targeting of mostly innocent people, is nothing other than a genocide being perpetrated by Israeli forces in Gaza that deserves our condemnation and must be brought to an end as a matter of urgency. The horrors endured by the Palestinian people are now reflected in a toll of more than 40,000 dead, including innocent women and children, and more than 100,000 wounded, the forcible displacement of thousands in inhumane conditions and the systematic destruction of hospitals and social housing.
In reaffirming its full solidarity with, and unremitting support for, the brotherly people of Palestine, the Union of the Comoros issues an urgent appeal to the international community for action to bring about an immediate cessation of hostilities and a swift resumption of the delivery of humanitarian aid. We also call for a just and lasting solution on the basis of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. In particular, we urge the international community to work swiftly to achieve a two-State solution — a sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living alongside and in complete security with Israel. We welcome the admission of the State of Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations and its participation in the work of the United Nations, as of this session. I wish also to point out that the situation in the West Bank likewise is very grave. As Cardinal Pizzaballa, Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, has underscored, events there are a tangible and concrete example of how hatred, resentment and contempt have led to increasingly extreme forms of violence that are increasingly difficult to contain.
We are also paying close attention to the situation in the Sudan. We call on both parties to the conflict to show restraint, to spare the people from the horrors of the war, which for our brothers has gone on for far too long.
As to Western Sahara, the Union of the Comoros takes the view that the plan for the autonomy of the territory within the Cherifian Kingdom, presented by the Moroccan authorities in 2007, is the surest way of achieving a lasting settlement to an anachronistic conflict, the prolongation of which would be antithetical to the very interests of the communities concerned and to economic development throughout region. My country therefore calls on the stakeholders to adhere to the plan and urges the international community to afford them its support.
Moreover, I would like to underline that international law and openness to dialogue must prevail when tackling problems, and policies in particular. The same can be said for respect for the territorial integrity of States. Accordingly, as regards the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte, I would like to remind the Assembly that Comorian unity is a reality based on ethno-geographical, linguistic, religious and economic facts, despite the fact that the country is an island. In addition, there is the country’s attachment to the sacrosanct principles of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, which recognize the sovereignty of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte.
I would therefore like to take the opportunity provided by my presence on this rostrum of the United Nations, the symbol of multilateralism par excellence, to reaffirm the Comorian Government’s steadfastness in its desire to respect the law and its openness to dialogue regarding the dispute between the Union of the Comoros and France, in order to reach a fair and lasting solution that preserves the shared interests of our two friendly countries.
The Union of the Comoros reiterates its support for the resolution adopted by the Summit of the Future (resolution 79/1) on 22 September, during this session of the Assembly. We call for genuine international collaboration to establish guidelines that will lead to legal tools guaranteeing the development and equitable use of artificial intelligence, conducive to development, growth, productivity and knowledge throughout the world. Among other things, the resolution opens up promising prospects for addressing the specific problems of small island developing States. In that context, the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in May in Antigua and Barbuda, also marked further progress in this universal realization.
Also, given our call for strict compliance with the Paris Agreement and for substantial financial and technical support, we are looking forward with great interest to the next International Conference on Financing for Development, scheduled to take place in Spain in 2025. The Conference will be an opportunity for the countries of the South to advocate for reforms of the multilateral development banks and institutions and to obtain a forward-looking framework for sustainable, accessible and predictable resources for our countries. To ensure the success of that event, I hope that the main countries concerned will come together without delay to work on formulating their proposals.
Peace and political stability are the two essential pillars underpinning all development initiatives. Consequently, following the elections of 14 January 2024, which once again made His Excellency Mr. Azali Assoumani the country’s Head of State, he set about pursuing the noble mission of accelerating the emergence of the Comoros by 2030. The Head of State’s commitment to accelerating the country’s emergence is reflected in the implementation of the flagship projects contained in the Comoros Emerging Plan and presented at the conference of Comoros’ development partners, held in Paris in December 2019. The Comoros Emerging Plan also includes a number of structuring projects, including the blue economy development programme, in a highly promising sector that is one of the driving forces behind economic and social transformation.
Aware of the crucial role of the blue economy and keen to highlight the special nature of island States, my country organized the Ministerial Conference on the Blue Economy and Climate Action in Africa, in Moroni in June 2023, under the Comorian presidency of the African Union and with the support of a number of partners, with the theme “Island and coastal States at the forefront”. The Conference was attended by all the island and coastal States of Africa. The Moroni declaration, adopted at the end of the Conference, sets out, inter alia, the elements of the road map to be implemented, with a view to the international community taking account of the particular nature and vulnerability of these States. The forthcoming Ocean Conference will give us the opportunity to present the Moroni declaration, which contains commitments in line with the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Comorian Government pays particular attention to young people. A number of initiatives are under way to develop youth entrepreneurship, ensure better job opportunities in various sectors and enable them to play a leading role in the country’s socioeconomic development. The promulgation of the “One youth — one job” law is a clear demonstration of that commitment. The commitment of the Head of State of the Union of the Comoros to the development of young people and the confidence he places in this population group to give impetus to a new dynamic, as the driving force of the country, led him to appoint, only a few months ago, a Government composed mainly of young executives. He has thus taken up the challenge of working with young people to transform the country and renew the Comoros.
In addition to those key areas, the Head of State has also included sport, culture, art and heritage in his five-year agenda, thereby demonstrating his interest in these aspects of society, which help to shape and strengthen our national identity. As far as sport is concerned, on behalf of the President of the Union of the Comoros and his Government, I would like to pay a warm tribute to our national football team, the Coelacanths, for the steady gains they have been achieving on the continent, to the great pride of the Comorian people.
The challenges facing the world today are manifold and call for concerted action by all of us to meet them. Each session of the Assembly is a source of hope for people — hope for changes that alleviate all their fears and anxieties. In the name of the noble values that unite us, let us work to transform those anxieties into peace and those fears into hopes and, above all, into the fulfilment of the aspirations of our respective peoples.
