Numerous armed conflicts continue to ravage various world regions, with devastating impacts on their populations, communities and humanitarian actors, particularly in the Middle East, where the potential for escalation and risk of spillover are all too evident. Innocent lives are being lost daily in an unrelenting and merciless cycle of violence. We urge all parties involved, alongside the international community and relevant organizations, to spare no effort to put an end to those conflicts, commit to dialogue and uphold the values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, international law and humanitarian law, thereby allowing a gradual return to normalcy and the possibility of building a future free from the destruction and indiscriminate death of today.
At the national level, we remain committed to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Agenda 2063 of the African Union. We are also focused on implementing policies aimed at ensuring universal access to quality education and healthcare and fully integrating young people into all spheres of social, economic and political life, ensuring that future generations are equipped with the tools they need to tackle global challenges. This year, we were proud to be certified by the World Health Organization as a malaria-free country — a comforting and encouraging testament to our commitment to health and healthcare as a fundamental right for all. While many nations — in particular in Africa — are still grappling with this terrible disease, we have a unique opportunity to eradicate the preventable and treatable ailments that have long plagued humankind, causing suffering, hindering progress and trapping millions in poverty. To achieve that goal, I call on the upcoming restructuring meeting of the twenty-first replenishment round of the International Development Association Global Fund, to be held in Paris next month, to prioritize funding through a dedicated budget line aimed at eliminating diseases. Microbial pathogens and antimicrobial resistance also pose significant threats to global health. Understanding and managing microbial activity is therefore crucial for addressing challenges related to disease control, food security, environmental conservation and climate change.
In this troubled and challenging international landscape, where multiple crises continue to affect people and the planet, I reaffirm Cabo Verde’s strong commitment to being an active and constructive Member of the United Nations, tirelessly championing the universal values contained in its Charter. Among those crises, climate change disproportionately affects vulnerable nations, in particular small island developing States. We look to the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to yield urgent and tangible progress on key climate issues, particularly as the deadline for significant emissions reductions approaches. Our people, especially communities in small island developing States (SIDS), seek bolder commitments, specifically from high-emitting countries, and the swift implementation of climate policies and funding mechanisms that are not only ambitious, but also equitable and effective. Rising sea levels, which are also caused by climate change, require special attention. The challenge is multidimensional and extends far beyond island and coastal populations: it affects all continents and regions, leaving no one immune to the catastrophe in the making. We therefore welcome today’s high-level meeting on addressing the existential threats posed by rising sea levels.
Last year, on the sidelines of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly, the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction was opened for signature, representing an international milestone in the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction, that is, on the high seas, which constitute about 60 per cent of the world’s oceans. I am proud to say that my country, Cabo Verde, signed the Agreement on the first day and is currently finalizing the ratification process. I call on all nations that have not yet done so to also sign and ratify that important instrument for the conservation of life in our oceans.
Being an ocean nation, the landmass of Cabo Verde is tiny when compared to its immense maritime territory. That is why I did not hesitate to accept the honour of an invitation from UNESCO to become Patron of the Ocean Decade Alliance, as part of the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. As an ocean nation that is heavily dependent on marine resources, our role in the Ocean Decade focuses on local and global action to promote sustainable ocean management. We have concentrated on the importance of sustainable ocean management, in particular for small island developing States, which are very vulnerable to climate change and marine ecosystem degradation. For three consecutive years, we have hosted international ocean conferences to foster partnerships among Governments, the private sector, scientists and civil society in order to advance ocean science and create innovative solutions to ocean-related challenges. That is why it is important to bring together key stakeholders in order to boost collaborative solutions for the oceans, help develop research capacities to study the impact of climate change and ocean acidification and promote knowledge-sharing and technology transfer, with a view to improving ocean monitoring and observation systems.
The United Nations convened the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States in May, and we are delighted with its success. However, to ensure greater resilience and the sustainability of SIDS, we must begin to implement the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS as a matter of urgency. Cabo Verde remains continues to play an active role in the community of SIDS and, in the first quarter of 2025, will host a high-level meeting for the Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean and South China Sea regions, which will be aimed at establishing a coordination mechanism for the subregion. At the Conference, we also expressed our readiness to host the fifth International Conference on SIDS in 2034.
As small island developing States, our macroeconomic systems are facing serious problems of scale. Even if we were to allocate our entire State budget to sustainable development and climate action, it would still fall short of the necessary funding targets. In most SIDS, that situation is exacerbated by a significant lack of capacity to navigate new financial tools. While the pace of reform of the global financial architecture is slow, there is also an urgent need to accelerate development processes. We must swiftly and significantly scale up technical assistance and capacity-building efforts to finance sustainable development so as to ensure that the global South is not left behind. In that regard, we welcome the recent approval of the multidimensional vulnerability index, which is crucial, in particular for SIDS and other vulnerable groups, as it provides a comprehensive and differentiated way of assessing our development needs and challenges, thus affording a broader and more accurate understanding of how various factors influence the development of countries.
In my capacity as African Union Champion for the Preservation of Natural and Cultural Heritage in Africa and in line with the Government of Cabo Verde’s policies in those areas, I have been tirelessly advocating the protection, promotion and sustainable management of Africa’s rich natural and cultural heritage, which is highly vulnerable to climate change. It is essential that we continue to raise awareness of the need to safeguard our natural and cultural heritage, which includes diverse ecosystems, historical landmarks, traditional knowledge and intangible cultural practices. There is an urgent need to foster African identity through the promotion of African languages, traditional arts and the gamut of cultural expression so as to reinforce the continent’s diverse cultural history and its contribution to global culture and human heritage. The restitution of cultural assets, such as artefacts, works of art and sacred objects, which are an integral part of the cultural identity, history and traditions of their communities of origin, is of vital importance — not only for Africa, but also for many other regions of the world. Their removal has disrupted cultural continuity, and their return to their original setting would safeguard their cultural and spiritual integrity and thus enable local communities to reconnect with their heritage, fostering cultural pride and preserving their identities for future generations.
I am delighted to announce that, in 2025, we will host a high-level meeting in Cabo Verde focused on the Atlantic dimension of the Creole, bringing together academics, historians, social scientists, scholars of Creole languages, artists, writers, filmmakers, men and women of culture, as well as world leaders. They will represent the plurality of geographical spaces in which the Atlantic dimension of the Creole is affirmed — a dimension in which Africans and their descendants have played an integral part in building. That 2025 meeting seeks to build on the results of projects like the Routes of Enslaved Peoples: Resistance, Liberty and Heritage and the International Decade for People of African Descent, as well as the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban in 2001. Our intention is to debate and celebrate the Creole — the Creole dimension — as a complex and very rich reality that is the product of human ties woven between peoples of the various peri-Atlantic continents during the navigation of the ocean that began in the fifteenth century. From those encounters, new forms of culture and ways of organizing society emerged and endured, marking a particularly fruitful moment of social and cultural innovation. The meeting will involve days of intense academic and scientific reflection, in addition to artistic displays, cultural exchange and reconnection encompassing the performing arts, Creole cuisine, handicrafts and music. The meeting will also offer days of political and strategic debate among decision-makers concerning the dialogue between peoples and cultures, peace and the future of humankind.
