Costa Rica congratulates the President of the General Assembly on his election to lead the Assembly and reaffirms its commitment to advancing towards a more peaceful, just, sustainable and inclusive world.
We come to this session amid the reactivation of the arms race, growing geopolitical tensions and systematic violations of human rights and of the principles of international law. With those challenges comes the spread of violent conflicts from Africa to Europe and the Middle East. And, on our own continent, we are facing the growing presence of drug trafficking and international organized crime. We are also facing the triple planetary crisis, rising poverty and inequality and widening gaps and disparities within countries and regions.
Meanwhile, our collective responses remain timid, delayed and inadequate. None of those challenges can be solved by a single State or a limited group of States. Only through multilateralism as the linchpin of cooperation will we be able to confront and overcome those challenges.
With multilateralism at the centre of my remarks, allow me to make four observations.
First, democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights are pillars of the effective functioning of the multilateral system. Democracy is the political system that embraces one and all. In it, every voice finds its echo, and every person their place. It is the natural expression of the rule of law. Venezuela cannot be considered a democracy. A democracy does not expel 8 million of its citizens or provoke an unprecedented migration crisis with repercussions that are felt throughout the entire western Hemisphere. A democracy does not persecute or intimidate. It does not imprison or torture for political reasons. A democracy does not deny opposition representatives access to vote counting, nor does it declare itself, without any proof or evidence, the winner of elections. Costa Rica, like the vast majority of countries in the region, condemns the manipulation of the results and continues to demand impartial, transparent and independent verification, which the Venezuelan regime has refused to carry out. There is no doubt that Nicolás Maduro did not win the elections, just as there is no doubt that he intends to remain in power at all costs. Let us not allow repression and dictatorship in Venezuela to be normalized once again.
That is not the only violation of democratic principles in my region. Thousands of people cross our northern border daily, fleeing the repression of a dictatorship that has lasted nearly three decades in Nicaragua. That dictatorship has deprived them of their freedom, their human rights, their dreams and even their citizenship, rendering them stateless. As Costa Rica was the first country in Latin America to grant nationality to a stateless person, we urge the international community to intensify efforts to do away with that vulnerable status.
We also cannot remain indifferent to the situation in Haiti. The humanitarian crisis in that country has elicited a minimal and immorally low response from the international community. The $674 million required by the humanitarian needs and response plan for Haiti represents only 0.03 per cent of global military spending, which in 2023 reached $2.44 trillion, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. That 0.03 per cent of global military spending amounts to a minuscule drop of hope in an ocean of militarization.
Violence and crime have grown alarmingly worldwide, and Latin America and the Caribbean are no exception. Criminal networks have established themselves as a complex phenomenon that transcends national borders. Those organizations, which are involved in such illicit activities as drug trafficking, trafficking in persons and the smuggling of weapons and ammunition, have found fertile ground for growth in the region, whether as a result of corruption, a lack of opportunities for youth or limited police capacity to combat those organizations. The interconnection of those networks not only affects the security and well-being of local communities, but also has an impact on global stability, given that the operations of such networks tend to extend through transit countries and into international markets.
Faced with that state of affairs, the international community must adopt a coordinated and multilateral approach, promoting cooperation and information-sharing along with strong legal measures to combat those networks. Only through joint efforts can the structure of those organizations be dismantled and peace and security ultimately restored in the region.
That brings me to my second observation: at the heart of multilateralism lies peace. There is no peace without justice. However, its heartbeat weakens with the escalation of conflicts in Gaza, Lebanon, Ukraine, the Red Sea, the Sudan, the Sahel, Yemen, Myanmar and Syria. Those crises expose the fragility of our collective security system and demand that all parties to the conflict uphold their obligations under international law, in particular international humanitarian law. There are norms and principles that must be respected without exception, especially the protection of civilians and the principles of proportionality, limitation, distinction and humanity.
With regard to each of those conflicts, Costa Rica reiterates its call on all parties involved for the establishment of an immediate and unconditional ceasefire; for safe, uninterrupted and unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance to be ensured; for the release of hostages and detainees; for the withdrawal of troops from affected areas; and for the de-escalation of tensions. It is also urgent to comply in good faith with all decisions adopted by international courts and the Security Council, because there can be no lasting peace without justice.
While expressing its deep concern about the weakening of international humanitarian disarmament instruments, Costa Rica urges States to reverse this trend and renew their efforts to ensure that civilians do not become victims of the use of weapons with indiscriminate effects. We also urge the avoidance of the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas or their surroundings, and we invite all States to participate in the upcoming international conference on the humanitarian consequences of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, to be held in July 2025 in San José.
However, we must go farther. Costa Rica calls for a consensus to be reached on governance frameworks for artificial intelligence in both the military and civilian spheres. Those frameworks must regulate autonomous systems with transformative capabilities that operate without human intervention. The recently adopted Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I) sets the multilateral system in motion to address artificial intelligence and is key for its research and development, not just its applications.
Thirdly, Costa Rica considers that the international financial infrastructure is at imminent risk of becoming obsolete in addressing current and future challenges. We therefore call most vigorously for an international financial system that is transparent, inclusive and sustainable. We require a financial architecture that meets requirements, does not perpetuate global inequalities and addresses the urgent need for access to financing — financing that must be sufficient and concessional, with effective debt relief mechanisms for developing countries. Costa Rica recognizes the efforts of some international financial institutions to align their processes with transformation commitments, and we urge the States that make up the boards of the major international financial institutions to prioritize that urgent reform. We advocate for the urgent capitalization of multilateral development banks and call for the increased use of new and innovative financing mechanisms, such as green and blue bonds and debt-for-ecosystem services swaps. Middle-income countries and economies in transition like Costa Rica require the international financial system to provide development financing tools that are suited to our specific needs and that are flexible and adapted to fiscal and structural circumstances. We hope that the Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development will generate concrete agreements and demonstrate the political will necessary.
Fourthly, and in order to ensure the well-being of our future generations, multilateralism must also be blue. Costa Rica has developed a strong blue diplomacy that recognizes the crucial role played by the ocean in the health of the planet. To have a habitable planet, we need a healthy ocean. It produces 50 per cent of the oxygen we breathe, it is the world’s largest source of protein, the greatest carbon sink and climate regulator, and its biodiversity supports the livelihoods of 3 billion people worldwide. It is therefore urgent that the new Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction enters into force, that we conclude an ambitious plastics treaty and that we ensure that no deep-sea mining begins until there are guarantees that it will not harm the marine environment. For the health of the planet and to respond to the multiple challenges that the ocean faces, I invite members all to participate in the third United Nations Ocean Conference, which Costa Rica and France will co-host in June 2025 in Nice, France.
The multilateral system is being tested, and we all know it. Its renewal will depend on courageous leadership, innovative proposals and our collective ability to honour the principles and norms of international law without double standards. Its renewal will be realized when we begin to shift resources from the coffins of war to the foundations of peace. The time is now, the opportunity is unique, and the call is urgent.
