Let my first words be to ratify Cuba’s solidarity and support for the brother Palestinian people, victim of more than 75 years of colonial occupation and flagrant violations of their legitimate rights as a nation, subjected to cruelty, aggression, collective punishment and apartheid. Over the past 11 months, the Israeli army has killed more than 40,000 civilians. More children have died in that indiscriminate massacre than men and women. They die with the complicity of and weapons provided by the United States Government, with the complicit silence of others. We pay tribute to the more than 220 workers of the Organization who also have been murdered.
Cuba’s position is clear and unequivocal. President Miguel Díaz-Canel Bermúdez has said: “History will not forgive the indifferent, and we will not be among them”. The genocide against the Palestinian people must cease unconditionally and without delay. Israel, with the complicity of the United States, has put the world in imminent danger of a large-scale conflagration. The irresponsible aggression against Lebanon, Syria, Iran and the peoples of the Middle East will have consequences that are difficult to estimate.
Seventy-nine years after the founding of the Organization, the continuous violations of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, aggressions, interference in the internal affairs of States and the imposition of unilateral coercive measures for political ends occur as daily events. Aggressive military doctrines of domination, expansionist and supremacist, alarmingly undermine international peace and security.
The danger of a nuclear hecatomb is real and immediate. For the ninth consecutive year, global military spending is increasing, reaching a record figure of $2.44 trillion in 2023, including the development of new nuclear weapons. There has been a decline despite the enormous efforts of the States parties and signatories to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and of lucid and broad sectors of international society.
There will also be no peace without development. Developed countries, inhabitants of the same planet, blindly refuse to invest even minimally in their own prosperity and security and fail to meet their always insufficient commitments to official development assistance. The selfish figure, proudly promised in 2023 and quickly forgotten, represents less than 0.37 per cent of their national income.
The illusion of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals has vanished. According to Forbes, in the past four years alone the combined wealth of the five richest people in the world has grown while 5 billion people remain in poverty. The richest 1 per cent have accumulated twice as much wealth as the rest of the world’s population. Those five billionaires have made more than €423 billion in profits during this period, while the world’s population is becoming poorer. According to Oxfam, the richest 1 per cent have accumulated twice as much wealth as the rest of the world’s population. A wealth tax could lift 2 billion people out of poverty. The crises are structural, determined by the imperialist system and the international order imposed on us. No problem will be solved by undermining the intergovernmental character of the United Nations, as some claim, or by weakening its essential role in promoting sustainable development for all.
Climate change is advancing inexorably. That is an irrefutable fact. In July, scientists announced that there had been 13 consecutive months of record-breaking temperature levels. If the irrational and unsustainable patterns of production and consumption of capitalism are not urgently and significantly changed, the increase in global average temperature will not be contained below 1.5°C with respect to preindustrial levels. Responsibilities are shared but differentiated; they are not the same for everyone and could not rightly be so.
However, a good step could be taken at the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Azerbaijan and the adoption of the new collective financing target. The countries of the North would have another opportunity to begin to close the gap in climate financing. Those of us in the South would have to design a sufficient target that responds to the needs, with guarantees for development and social justice, in the face of the enormous obstacles and challenges we face. The solution will inevitably have to include the cancellation of the external debt, which has already been repaid several times.
We need a new international order that is just and democratic; that guarantees peace and the balance of the world, the exercise of the right to development by all States; in conditions of sovereign equality; that expands and strengthens the participation and representation of developing countries in the processes of governance, decision-making and policy formulations at the global level; that provides the common good and prosperity of all peoples, in harmony with nature and the sustainable management of natural resources, and ensures the exercise of all human rights for all people. We need a new civilized coexistence among nations in which solidarity, international cooperation, integration and the peaceful settlement of disputes prevail as alternatives to the philosophy of plunder, war, the use or threat of use of force, aggression and occupation, as well as to cultural, political, financial, technological and military domination and hegemony or any other manifestation that threatens the peace, independence and sovereignty of States. We need an international order without blockades or unilateral coercive measures, based on multilateralism and with full respect for the United Nations Charter and international law.
The United States Government continues to clearly demonstrate its impossible but pernicious resolve to determine and control the destiny of Cuba. It is an old ambition anchored in the Monroe Doctrine, which defines the imperialist, dominant and hegemonic nature of United States policy towards Cuba and the region of our America. The economic, commercial and financial blockade is also political, technological and communicational. It has been conceived as one of the United States main weapons of aggression to destroy the Cuban economy. It seeks to prevent the country’s financial income, cause the collapse of the economy and generate a situation of political and social instability.
The damage is visible and indisputable. It has repercussions on the daily lives of all Cubans. It is accompanied by the most ferocious campaign of disinformation and slander, by perennial attempts to interfere in our internal affairs and by the complicit tolerance of groups that organize violent and terrorist acts against Cuba from the territory of the United States. Those actions violate international law and contravene the purposes and principles of the Organization and numerous resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
The siege thus conceived has been reinforced by the inclusion of Cuba on the arbitrary and infamous list of countries that supposedly sponsor terrorism by the United States Department of State. That is a fraudulent designation without moral authority or any international mandate. By virtue of it, retaliatory actions against Cuba are unleashed that, in an extraterritorial manner, go beyond the framework of the sovereign jurisdiction of the United States and are manifested in and against any country. In May, the State Department itself recognized that Cuba fully cooperates in the international fight against terrorism. That mere recognition of a universally known truth has not made the coercive measures of the blockade more flexible, but it does make Cuba’s presence on that illegitimate list even more incongruous, confusing and unjustifiable.
There will soon be new presidential elections in the United States, a matter that concerns the Americans alone — only them, despite the disastrous and historical custom of the Government of that country of interfering in the elections and internal affairs of all States Members of the United Nations, including its own allies. History has shown that, regardless of the result of the elections, the anti-Cuban politicians and sectors that have made aggression against Cuba a lucrative business will continue to have a voice and influence. They have learned to manipulate the American political system based on a narrow and hostile agenda that is very specific and of interest only to a small elite segment. They do not in any way represent the will of the majority of the people of the United States or of the Cubans who reside here. Whatever the electoral result, Cuba will continue to defend its sovereign right to independence and to build socialism, as we Cubans have decided, without foreign interference. We will also continue to advocate for a respectful and constructive relationship with the United States.
In 2014, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States decided in Havana to proclaim our region as a zone of peace. That historic commitment gains greater validity every day. We defend peace and multilateralism against unilateral coercive measures that seriously harm Syria, Belarus, Nicaragua, Venezuela, Zimbabwe, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran, Russia, Cuba and other nations. We strongly reject any attempt to undermine the legitimate constitutional order in our countries by fomenting coups. That happened in Bolivia in 2019 and on 26 June this year, and it is intended to happen again in Honduras.
We denounce the attempts to generate violence and destabilization in Venezuela. We reiterate our firm support for and solidarity with the Chavista Government of Bolivia and the civic-military union of the Venezuelan people, led by President Nicolás Maduro Moros. Calls to ignore the election results are irresponsible and disrespectful of the popular will and its legitimate institutions.
The destabilizing actions against the Government of Reconciliation and National Unity of Nicaragua must cease. The brotherly people of Sandino will continue to enjoy our full support.
We reiterate our support for the legitimate right to self-determination and independence of Puerto Rico.
The international community owes a historic debt to Haiti, the protagonist of the first independence and anti-slavery revolution on the continent. We welcome the efforts of the Caribbean Community to find a sustainable solution to the tragic situation in Haiti that respects the independence and sovereignty of that sister nation.
We support the legitimate right of sovereignty of the Argentine people over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia, the South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime spaces.
We reaffirm our support and commitment to the peace efforts in Colombia, to which Cuba will continue to contribute in every way possible in its capacity as guarantor.
Africa, the cradle of humanity, can always count on Cuba in its efforts to advance on its path to development. We reaffirm our unwavering solidarity with the Sahrawi people and the exercise of their self-determination.
Cuba expresses its firm rejection of actions aimed at harming the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the People’s Republic of China, condemns interference in its internal affairs and reiterates its unwavering support for the principle of one China, in accordance with the decision of the General Assembly in its historic resolution 2758 (XXVI), recognizing the People’s Republic as the sole and legitimate representative of the Chinese people.
We advocate a serious, constructive, realistic and peaceful diplomatic solution to the current war in Ukraine, in accordance with international law, that guarantees the security and sovereignty of all. In that context, Cuba supports the joint proposal presented by China and Brazil for a political solution to this crisis.
Let us join forces to ensure that multilateral institutions are effective and that they respond to the interests of the people, the humble, the poor, the needy and the exploited, who are the vast majority, on the basis of fair equality, the exercise of human rights by all human beings and respect for the sovereign rights of each nation.
