At the outset, I wish to congratulate His Excellency Ambassador Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. He can count on the steadfast of Cyprus support for his mission.
I humbly stood at this podium for the first time last year (see A/78/PV.6). My main premise then was that the Charter of the United Nations was not a reality, but a promise — a sacred pledge that we inherited from our predecessors, from those who had the remarkable courage and clarity of vision to put pen to paper, to turn vision into action and to solemnly declare: “never again”. Those great visionaries, who had the audacity to build peace upon the smouldering ashes of war, assumed the tremendous responsibility to look beyond the horrors of the past, to learn from history — however painful it may be — and to lay the foundations of a world anchored in peace and stability and respect for international law and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States — a world that leaves no one behind and ensures prosperity and human dignity for all. Like a burning torch, lit from those ashes, that promise was passed on to us. Our predecessors’ voices are echoed in the halls of this building, which stands as a beacon and a symbol of the only path towards the fulfilment of the United Nations Charter, which each and every State and each and every one of us undertook to uphold: multilateralism, respect for international law, diplomacy, the peaceful settlement of disputes, cooperation instead of the use of force and aggression, the laying down of arms and a world order that does not appease the aggressor or the violator of international legality.
Only a few weeks after last year’s General Assembly, on 7 October 2023, the world was shocked by the unimaginable and horrendous brutality of the terrorist attack perpetrated against innocent civilians. No one was spared the blindness and cruelty of the terror that Saturday morning: women raped, children killed and abducted, the elderly witnessing the burning flames of their loved ones, whose future was extinguished before their eyes and whose screams penetrated their hearts, forever changing the landscape of their lives, and penetrated the conscience of humankind. There is never justification for terror. There is never justification for such blatant disregard for human life and dignity, no matter where that life comes from, no matter whom it concerns. It concerns us all. When rape is used as a weapon of war against women and girls, when children are abducted, our voice needs to be loud, clear, united and unequivocal: those are our daughters; those are our children. And we failed them. Let me be clear: ours is a mission to help the innocent. Innocence knows no country, age, race or religion. Human pain and human dignity are equal for all, and the latter must be upheld always, in each and every context.
In the immediate aftermath of the attack of 7 October 2023 and as the humanitarian situation in Gaza deteriorated, my country, the Republic of Cyprus, acted. We acted on our moral responsibility to help the innocent civilians — men, women and children — of Gaza suffering abhorrent conditions that no human should ever endure. As a country that is an integral part of the region, Cyprus built on the long-standing bonds of friendship and trust with our neighbours.
Fulfilling our duty as an anchor of stability in a turbulent sea, as the lighthouse of the European Union (EU) in the Eastern Mediterranean, we delivered the Amalthea maritime corridor to the international community — a lifeline of hope and humanity. The Cyprus humanitarian corridor is a manifestation of the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations: cooperation and multilateralism. It aptly demonstrates the power of diplomacy, which is one of our most powerful tools. Cyprus worked closely with regional and international partners, such as the United Arab Emirates and the United States, with the concrete support of the European Union and the United Nations, united by a shared vision. Those guiding principles are the beacon of our engagement in international relations — the power of diplomacy as a force for good. We have consistently manifested that commitment and will continue to do so. Cyprus has acted, time and time again, as a regional evacuation hub at times of crisis — a safe bridge and a safe haven for civilians.
The children of Palestine, who have been orphaned and forced to live in tents, with no access to the most basic items of existence, namely, food, shelter, education and safety, are also our children. No child should ever endure such a nightmare. They did not cause the war; they do not deserve it. They suffer in silence. Their cries haunt our conscience. We have failed them, too. The situation in Gaza is a desperate cry for us to act decisively. We must do all that is in our power, and we must act, as leaders, States and international and regional organizations. My country has emphatically stressed the need for respect for international humanitarian law, the protection of civilians, the rapid, safe and unhindered flow of humanitarian aid into Gaza and the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages. The war must end now. The suffering must stop now. We have also consistently underlined and acted on the imperative of avoiding further escalation and destabilization in our region and the vital importance of preventing regional escalation. We are deeply alarmed by the recent developments in our neighbouring Lebanon and stress the need for restraint. We must take a step back from the brink.
The wider region of the Eastern Mediterranean and the greater Middle East — our neighbourhood — is no doubt a turbulent region, faced with a multitude of complex challenges. And yet that neighbourhood is so much more than the prevailing narrative. I will never accept the linear narrative of a region in turmoil. It is a narrative that ignores the complexities but also the immense promise of the region and its people, the dynamics of opportunity and change that are unfolding. I have watched the journey closely, witnessing the fruit of cooperation in the region, experiencing first-hand what countries of the region can achieve when they come together behind a common vision for the future, committed to multilateralism, always with respect for international legality. And I am convinced that the Eastern Mediterranean and the wider Middle East can move decisively beyond the prevailing narrative of being a region in turmoil and become a hub of stability, peace and cooperation.
For the region to fulfil its promise, there must be a path for lasting peace. There is an urgent need to reinvigorate the Middle East peace process and reach a political settlement in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions. There is no other path to take. After the tragedy and suffering of the past year, let us exert every effort to ensure that there is a lifeline to peace. There are no shortcuts, no alternatives or substitutes to a lasting peace. There are no frozen conflicts. The vacuum created in the absence of a viable peace becomes a breeding ground for crisis and conflict. We can never be complacent. That is a painful lesson that recent history has taught us over and over again.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine — a sovereign nation — came as yet another stark reminder of what is at stake if we do not defend and uphold the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter. Cyprus strongly condemns any breach of international peace and security effected through military action — by any State — against the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of another. Since the first day of Russian invasion, my country has stood unwaveringly on the right side of history. Cyprus, my country, itself a victim of invasion and continuing occupation, has steadfastly supported the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine.
The torch for peace in Cyprus is waiting to be lit. This year, on 20 July, we mourned 50 years since the Turkish invasion of Cyprus. Through use of force, Türkiye currently occupies a sovereign European State. It is violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an EU member State. It has been 50 years, half a century, of continuing Turkish occupation of approximately 37 per cent of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus; of the continuous violation of the United Nations Charter, international law, including international humanitarian and human rights law; 50 years of the displaced stoically waiting to return to their ancestral homes; 50 years of the mothers of the missing stoically awaiting the remains of their loved ones to be laid to rest in peace; half a century of blatant disregard for the Security Council resolutions that have also called for the return of the fenced town of Varosha to its lawful inhabitants and its transfer to the administration of the United Nations. And yet, they have also been 50 years of resilience and hope for peace by Cypriots; a burning desire and a deep belief by my people, by all Cypriots, that this cannot be the future of Cyprus. It cannot be the future of our children and the generations to come. They deserve to live and thrive in coexistence and co-creation in a reunified country, in conditions of viable peace.
I am often asked if I am optimistic about peace in Cyprus after 50 years. Let me recall the words of Jean Monnet, one of the inspired founders of the European Union, when he proclaimed that this is not a time for blind optimism or paralysing pessimism; now is the time to be determined. And so, the answer is that I am determined to work tirelessly and bravely for peace in Cyprus, to reunify my country and its people in a modern, viable European State, with no troops of occupation and no foreign guarantees. I am determined to provide for all Cypriots all the rights and fundamental freedoms that other Europeans enjoy. They deserve nothing less. I am determined not to fail them. To my Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot compatriots, I say that I hear their call for peace. It has not faded over time. It has grown louder, more determined. We look to the United Nations and to the Secretary-General, who understands the imperative of reunification, to fulfil the promise of peace and to deliver on the pledge of the United Nations Charter.
I am determined to continue exerting all efforts to resume negotiations for a viable solution to the Cyprus issue within the only framework — the relevant Security Council resolutions, which call for a bizonal, bicommunal federation with political equality, as defined by the resolutions, and fully in line with EU law, values and principles.
Since the last time I stood before the Assembly in this Hall, we have made every effort to resume the peace process. There is no alternative to the path of peace. I am committed, and I am ready to sit at the negotiating table today — not tomorrow, today. I have clarity of vision for the future of my country, for the future of our children, in a reunified, prosperous, viable European State.
To Mr. Erdoğan, I say: History will judge us. And history is unforgiving in the light it casts on leaders who have an opportunity to deliver peace and, instead, choose the path of revisionism and disregard for international law. Those who want to lead must lead by example. The voice of morality cannot have selective historical amnesia, or selective sensitivity to violations of international law. The aggressor, the violator of international law, cannot be the advocate of legality, nor point a finger at others.
At this podium yesterday, we heard Mr. Erdoğan advocate disregarding the United Nations Charter and violating Security Council resolutions and international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (see A/79/PV.7). And my response, the response of the international community, is clear — illegality stemming from invasion, aggression and the use of force cannot be recognized. International law is not à la carte; its interpretation does not change depending on who the violator is. It applies equally to all contexts and to all countries. It applies to Türkiye, a country that 50 years ago used force in violation of the United Nations Charter, invaded a sovereign State, and is an occupation force in Cyprus. It is an affront to the Assembly to call an invasion a peace operation. Revisionism cannot change reality — not now, not ever.
To Mr. Erdoğan, I also say: Now is the time to deliver on his proclaimed commitment to international law and to peace. No country that believes in the moral superiority of its position refuses to sit at the negotiating table. I adamantly believe that we can carve a new path — one of peace, cooperation and collaboration. We cannot change geography. It is an opportunity, not a curse. Türkiye and Cyprus will always remain neighbours. Let us change the narrative. Let us transform our proximity into a promise. Let us build together a legacy of peace that can be transformative for the whole region.
In Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), the Secretary-General remarked that humankind faces a stark and urgent choice — “a breakdown or a breakthrough”. I welcome the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace and support multilateral efforts towards peace and security. Collective action is urgently needed to address the changing nature of conflicts, including challenges posed by new technologies, the climate emergency, rising inequalities and backtracking on human rights. Halfway to the deadline, it is alarming that our world is off-track to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Despite some glimmers of hope, action, transformative solutions and comprehensive reforms are urgently needed. The agendas and resolutions are in place. We do not need more words; we need action. Human rights constitute the backbone of the multilateral system and are a top priority of Cyprus’s foreign policy. Guided by our long-lasting commitment to promoting, protecting and fulfilling all human rights, as well as advancing and strengthening international human rights within the United Nations, Cyprus has announced its first-ever candidacy for the Human Rights Council for the period from 2025 to 2027, with elections taking place this fall. Our candidature is rooted in our deep dedication to promoting, protecting and fulfilling basic human rights for all, as well as advancing and strengthening international human rights within the United Nations system.
The world is at an inflection point. Our children — the generations to come — are watching, and they will hold us accountable. The decisions we make today, the courage and vision we transform into action, have the potential to change the trajectory of the world. We have an opportunity to come together and to build a safer, more secure world through multilateralism by upholding the primacy of the Charter of the United Nations. The nature of the challenges we face is such that no country can address them on its own. We need to come together — we, the peoples of the United Nations, determined.
