It is a true honour for me to address the General Assembly today. Much to my regret, since the last time we met here, one year ago (see A/78/ PV.5), the world has not become any safer — quite the contrary. To start with, I would like to recall that the United Nations was created to save humankind from the scourge of war and destruction and to promote peace, justice and a better quality of life for all humankind. Together, we have managed to build a global system of rules and cooperation, with the ambition of advancing security and human rights instead of conflicts and suffering, and of fostering economic development instead of ignoring mass destruction. Aligned around the Charter of the United Nations, we have subscribed to not repeating the mistakes and disasters of the past. Unfortunately, we still do.
The world and its citizens need and deserve an effective United Nations that can respond quickly when needed and deliver better on our shared global commitments. Without a functioning multilateral system, alternative and exclusive structures would lead to more fragmentation and less predictability. It is our duty as national and global leaders to find common solutions to the most pressing problems before they get out of hand. Finding a compromise is never easy. It requires time and patience. Only if we realize that we can achieve much more together than when we are antagonistic can we make our nations — and the United Nations — truly united behind common goals.
Comprehensive reform of the Security Council is long overdue. A Council that is more effective, inclusive and accountable, and better able to reflect today’s realities by strengthening the voices of underrepresented regions, is crucially needed. In the face of the unjust and unprovoked Russian war against Ukraine, we must realize that Security Council membership is not carte blanche to act as we please. No one has the right to abuse power and bully other members of the international community without sanctions. Together we must put more pressure on Russia to end its unjust and brutal war. The peace summit in Switzerland clearly affirmed that peace in Ukraine must be based on international law and the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. The cynical nature of Russia’s policy, and its lack of interest in genuine peace talks, has global consequences. They include impaired nuclear safety, diminished food and energy security and damage to the rules-based international order.
Czechia calls on those who have not yet supported our common effort to evaluate the possibility of signing the joint declaration agreed at the peace summit in Switzerland. So far, many who aspire to become respected regional or global actors have remained silent. But respect cannot be forced. It can only be earned. Let us not forget that when we hesitate, we strengthen the aggressor. If leaders remain silent in the face of injustice and aggression, others will soon be waiting in line to see how far they can go in bending the international rules as they please. Some may think that Russia’s actions against Ukraine are just another regional conflict and that both sides need to meet each other halfway. But there is no such thing as just a regional conflict. Conflicts in one part of the world cause food insecurity and create waves of refugees in others. With globalization, our security and prosperity start way beyond our own borders.
Being fully aware of that, Czechia is committed not only to the security of Europe but of the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere as well. I applaud the fact that many nations, including African ones, spare no effort to achieve and safeguard peace and security in their own regions and far beyond. Czechia will continue to engage with African countries and listen closely to their views and needs. I believe that despite political differences, together we can create mutually beneficial partnerships, based on the principles of equality and mutual respect and without any historical burden or future material demands. Africa is a continent with huge economic potential that is waiting to be unlocked. We want to see it flourish, enhance its capabilities and create opportunities and jobs for young people.
The last topic I want to touch on is cybersecurity and technology. With the growing digital transformation and our increasing reliance on advanced technology, the gravity and scale of cyberthreats are increasing and respect no borders. Cyberespionage and cyberattacks on our hospitals, media, infrastructure, national institutions and businesses aim to destabilize our democratic system and undermine its principles. Just as we do offline, we cannot allow cyberspace to become a lawless criminal world. The agreed framework of responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace should guide us in our efforts to strive for a safer online world. The security of cyberspace will depend on the capacities and efforts of all responsible States to enhance their own cyber capabilities. Czechia is taking its commitment to the protection of global cyberspace security very seriously. We will continue to provide assistance to our partners in Africa, Asia and South America so that together we can improve our resilience and protect our citizens even better.
Foreign interference and disinformation continue to present a challenge with a serious impact on democracy, security and the rules-based international order. With the rapid development of new technologies, the protection and promotion of human rights continue to be vital for our societies. Emerging technologies will have an indisputable influence on the nature of our future conflicts, but also on peace. It is our duty to ensure that innovations — including artificial intelligence, autonomous systems, biotechnology and quantum computing — fully conform to our ethical and human rights standards. Last year Czechia, together with Mexico, Maldives, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and South Africa, submitted a draft resolution on human rights in the context of digital technologies (resolution 78/213). Furthermore, last month, during the Globsec Security Forum, I sat down with top managers of global technology companies at the Prague GeoTech Summit. I was glad to hear that they are fully aware of their responsibility and committed to contributing to the resilience of democracy.
The challenges we are facing are global, and we can succeed only if we fully commit to collective action and greater cooperation. The quality of our governance will be judged by our actions and by whether we leave this world in a better condition for future generations. I would like to thank everyone who is working tirelessly to make our planet a safer and more secure place for all. That is what really matters.
