We live in a world of quick headlines and even quicker slogans — “take back control”, “my country first” and “us against them”. Those slogans paint the world in black and white and seek to make us believe that things are very simple, that there is only one side that matters — “us against them”. I come from a country where the “us against them” logic was taken to the worst extremes that humankind has ever seen — a murderous world war that killed millions — and the worst imaginable crime against humanity — the Shoah, the genocide of 6 million Jews, who were dehumanized and murdered just for being Jews, because of the Nazi ideology, which would only accept the humanity of those they defined as Germans.
After the Second World War, this institution was founded on the understanding that “us against them” leads to disaster, that the world needs a countermodel: the Charter of the United Nations. It is a countermodel to a world in which we accept only the humanity of ourselves and not that of others; a countermodel that grants every country in the world the right to determine its own destiny and casts a positive vision of our shared future. It is a vision of an international order that is based on rules and the equality of every State and every human being, of cooperation instead of divisive nationalism, and of a humanity that is indivisible. And those are not simple slogans. They are the principles we try to live up to every day.
Yet living up to them is anything but simple. It demands hard work, perhaps now more than ever before. It requires empathy and solidarity — the opposite of “my country first”. It demands the will to put ourselves in other people’s shoes. Especially in times of crisis, it demands the strength to recognize others’ pain, even if our own pain seems unbearable, and to find common ground despite all the things that divide us. It also means that we must face the dilemma that the values of the Charter — such as the inherent right to self-defence and the responsibility to protect civilians, in particular when civilians are being used as human shields — can, at times, appear to contradict each other.
Resolving that is harder than simply exclaiming “either/or”, or “us against them”, especially in this time of social media, where simple TikTok “truths” seem to blur all complexity and nuance, sometimes even facts, as we are seeing regarding the war in the Middle East. In its ruthless attack of 7 October 2023, Hamas maimed and killed some 1,200 men, women and children. To this day, the terrorists are holding more than 100 people — men, women and children — hostage, including German citizens, including children. At the same time, in Gaza, hungry and traumatized children are wandering the ruins of what used to be their homes, desperately searching for their parents under the rubble.
Seeing all that, with our hearts burning, I guess it might be human nature that we are all tempted to fall emotionally for simple slogans, to see only one side. In addition, each of us is looking at the conflict from our own perspective and history. We need to respect that. But we must not stop there. Instead, we need to ask ourselves: “What if this were me? What if those were my children?”
In a competition of pain, there can be no winners — that is how the family of one of the hostages put it. Humanity is universal. If, in the darkest hour of her life, the mother of a murdered hostage finds the strength to see both sides, then we, as the leaders of countries around the world, who have the privilege to speak in this Hall, should be capable of doing the same. We must not fall for quick slogans, but instead rally around humanity in order to overcome the vicious circle of hate.
Universal humanity means that the rights of Israelis and Palestinians do not cancel each other out. And that is why my country stands by its commitment to the security of the State of Israel and why, at the same time, we are working every day to end the hell for the children of Gaza — because lasting security for Israelis will be possible only if there is lasting security for Palestinians. The opposite is also true: lasting security for Palestinians will be possible only if there is lasting security for Israelis. That is why we will not rest until the hostages are home. That is why we are working so hard for a ceasefire, including through the Biden plan, which was endorsed by the Security Council.
It is why, at the same time, together with our partners, we are working hard to get more humanitarian aid into Gaza. That is why I have been in the region 11 times since October. Germany alone has provided more than €360 million for humanitarian aid for Gaza and for Palestinian families there since last October. That is also why, yesterday, we came together with a group of countries to call for an immediate 21-day ceasefire along the Blue Line — because a broader regional escalation would not bring anyone long-lasting security. Frankly speaking, as frustrating and distressing as the lack of progress sometimes is, we are not giving up on seeking a political vision for Israelis and Palestinians to be able to live peacefully, side by side, in two States.
For me, resignation is simply not an option, because that would mean that the playbook of terrorism and extremism carries the day. We need to recognize each other’s pain and each other’s interests and listen openly to each other’s complaints, if we want to move forward. And if we do so, we might sometimes hear things we do not want to hear, such as our own shortcomings. Frankly, I remember how, two and a half years ago, I called on many colleagues here in this Hall and around the world for their support in standing up against Russia’s imperial war in Ukraine. One of my colleagues said: “But where were you when we needed you, when we were attacked by the Houthis?” And others said: “Youd did not stand with us in our anticolonial struggle.” And yes, that gave me pause, because they had a point. I firmly believe that critical self-reflection on what we or the generations before us in our countries have done wrong is actually to our benefit, because the ability to learn from past mistakes makes societies stronger and is the only way to build a better future.
That is why my country, Germany, has started to address our colonial past more thoroughly. The restitution of artefacts is a crucial element here. That is also why we are in the midst of an important reconciliation process with Namibia — because we cannot undo mistakes of the past, but we can unite for a better future. We can choose to do that every day through our own actions. Facing our colonial history, to me, means doing the right thing today, but it also means that we can stand up to the imperialist atrocities we are witnessing today.
Russia does not have a better future in mind for Ukraine. Ukraine is an independent State that gave up its nuclear arsenal in the 1990s because it believed in the principles and guarantees of the Charter of the United Nations and in its organs, such the Security Council. Three decades later, it is being attacked by one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, one of the countries that bears, as the Charter says, the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Russia’s war against Ukraine has been destroying Ukrainian cities, schools and hospitals for almost 1,000 days now. It is ravaging the security order of my continent, Europe. Its ripple effects have been felt by so many of those around the world represented here. Many members are feeling the consequences in their own countries, such as in food prices, among other things. That is why I understand why some are asking, including in the Security Council two days ago (see S/PV.9731): “Would the war not be over if you Europeans just stopped providing Ukraine with weapons?” There is nothing wrong with asking that, because we all wish for peace. But the idea that if there were no defensive weapons, there would be no fighting or dying in Ukraine, is as simple as it is wrong. We saw what happened in June, when Ukraine invited Russia to an international peace summit. Instead of stopping his attack and coming to the negotiation table, Putin sent his response by bombing a children’s hospital. As long as Putin is not willing to come to the negotiation table, stopping our support for Ukraine’s self-defence would simply mean leaving its children and its hospitals defenceless. It would mean more war crimes, not fewer — possibly in other countries, too.
Time and again within the past months, Putin’s Russia has been toying with the inviolability of the borders of the Baltic States and Poland. Two weeks ago, it fired a missile against a civilian grain ship in Romanian territorial waters. That is why today I am again asking for members’ support in calling on Putin to cease his attacks and come to the negotiation table, not only for our own European security, but also in the interests of all Member States. If a permanent member of the Security Council is allowed to conquer and destroy its smaller neighbour, the very essence of the Charter is under attack. If Russia stops attacking, the war will be over. If Ukraine stops defending itself, Ukraine will be over and so will our Charter, including the principles of sovereign equality — Article 2, paragraph 1; the peaceful settlement of disputes — Article 2, paragraph 3; and the prohibition on the use of force — Article 2, paragraph 4. That is why we will continue to stand firmly with Ukraine and our Charter to achieve a peace that is just and lasting, with security guarantees, a peace that secures Ukraine’s existence as a free and independent country, a peace that ensures security for Ukraine and Europe and thus for us all.
Obviously, none of that is easy. For almost 1,000 days now, so many countries have been working for Ukrainian children to sleep in their beds again and not in air raid shelters. For almost a year, so many of us have been working to help to end the suffering in the Middle East through countless talks in the region and countless meetings in our United Nations bodies. Sometimes I, too, feel like giving in to despair, but throwing up our hands in resignation, again, is not an option, because then the logic of “us versus them” takes over.
Moreover — and this is important to me — we tend to forget one thing in these times of crisis: there is a lot that we can achieve and that we have already achieved as an international community, every day, when we stand together and consider each other’s perspective. I will name only two striking recent examples.
Think about what we achieved at the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP) in Dubai, only a year ago, when we saw what is possible when we overcome the “us versus them” mentality — the industrial States versus the Group of 77, of the South versus the North — when we instead listened first of all to those most affected by the climate crisis, to our small island developing State partners, who have been telling us for decades that the climate crisis is threatening their very existence and is the biggest global security threat, and when, with more than 190 States, we finally agreed to mark the end of the fossil era at COP 28 and set up a loss and damage fund for the most vulnerable because to do so is just and fair.
We saw what we can achieve just earlier this week, here, when we adopted the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) — the Pact for our future. It took tough negotiations, hundreds of hours of drafting work in conference rooms, overnight sessions and last-minute compromises for more than two years. Many helped and did not give up in resignation, including our partners from Namibia and countless others. In the end, the vast majority of us found the strength to rally around what unites us: rules instead of brute nationalism, cooperation instead of division and a humanity that is universal.
It is in that spirit that Germany is running for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for 2027–2028. We are running as defenders of the Charter and of our shared principles. That means that we also need to take a critical look at the status quo in our multilateral institutions, because, in many ways, our multilateral system still reflects a time when hardly any of us here in the Hall had been born and when a striking number of countries — 142 — represented in this Hall today were not sitting at the table. That needs to change. That is why we are working for a reform of the Security Council so that it better reflects the world we actually live in and better represents African countries. Moreover, it is totally unjust that the two most important international financial institutions are headed only by Europeans and Americans.
Our institutions need to be accepted by all of us, and for that to happen, they need to represent all of us. “All of us” is not just the men of the world. The one thing that we definitely all have in common is that women make up at least 50 per cent of every single country. But in the 80 years of this Organization, there has never been a female Secretary-General. Therefore, if this Organization calls for equality and justice in the world, it is long overdue for us to exemplify those values, here in New York. We probably all should already practice saying the words: “Madam Secretary-General, the floor is yours”, because the next Secretary-General of the United Nations has to be a woman.
Obviously, that alone will not immediately end all the remaining inequality for women in our own countries. In the General Assembly, we hail from all regions of the world, but none of us have achieved full gender equality. I think that we can only achieve it together, by learning from each other and by speaking up for women’s rights, not only in our own countries but everywhere — because women’s rights are human rights, not northern, western, eastern or southern rights. They are universal. None of us want to be paid less than a male colleague for the same job, none of us want to be raped, and none of us want to be arrested for showing our hair — no women and, I would guess, no men either. That is because a life is a life. A Palestinian woman’s life is a life. An Israeli man’s life is a life. A Sudanese girl’s life is a life. A Ukrainian boy’s life is a life. Almost 80 years ago, the United Nations was founded for exactly that, the realization that simplistic slogans and “us versus them” lead to disaster and that humanity is indivisible.
