I would like to begin by warmly congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, and assuring him of the full support of the Republic of Djibouti in the execution of his mandate. The theme he has chosen for this session — “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere” — summarizes and reveals what millions of human beings around the world are demanding: a less unequal, more united, peaceful and prosperous world; a world where unity is not confused with the denial of particularities and where the recognition of a common destiny mobilizes the energy of all to build a better common future.
We reiterate our gratitude to his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for the immense work he has accomplished.
The world is going through a perilous period, characterized by disorder and uncertainty. The crisis is observable at several levels. Conflicts are proliferating and becoming increasingly violent. The conflicts in Ukraine and Gaza continue to rage while we are unable to agree conditions for the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement. Terrorism is progressing in several parts of the world, including on the African continent, where its metastasis is a source of concern for us. The annual financing gap for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is widening dangerously every day and many countries are facing a difficult financial situation, aggravated by the multiplicity of exogenous shocks and the debt burden. The crisis of confidence among Member States is affecting the multilateral system and undermining its credibility. The risk of geoeconomic fragmentation and trade wars constitute a set of factors that negatively impact global economic growth, generating chaos in which the interests and voice of developing countries are lost.
We have already made the diagnosis in our discussions dating back to the celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. We will therefore not return to it. The question is whether we will be able to use the windows of opportunity for renewal that are available to us, because, fortunately, there are a few. We must redouble our efforts, overcome our divisions and take collective action to end conflicts, put in place policies, investment programmes and partnerships to mitigate the delay in the implementation of the SDGs, and reform international financial institutions so that they can respond promptly and effectively to the emergencies and systemic shocks that many countries around the world are facing.
Financial institutions must provide developing countries with access to a larger volume of grants and financing on favourable terms, while preserving their risk tolerance for investments linked to sustainable development, including the use of innovative risk instruments. Those solutions must be discussed and deepened with a view to their implementation within the Economic and Social Council, whose role and place must be strengthened. The United Nations, as stipulated in the Charter, must play an important role in the work of global economic coordination, as it is the most democratic Organization. The Economic and Social Council must continue to play a leading role in identifying emerging challenges, promoting innovation and achieving economic, social and environmental integration of sustainable development.
We take this opportunity to express our deep gratitude to the States Members of the United Nations for the confidence they have shown in my country, Djibouti, by electing it in June as a member of the Economic and Social Council for the period 2025-2027. They can count on my delegation to defend those priority areas within the Council throughout its mandate.
Like many developing States, Djibouti is facing major challenges induced by climate change, including rising temperatures, the scarcity of water resources and rising sea levels. In the face of those persistent threats, the Government of Djibouti has implemented a series of ambitious and multidimensional measures aimed at mitigating the effects of climate change and strengthening the country’s resilience.
The twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change offers another window of renewal for the international community to prevent climate change commitments from falling behind schedule. It will be a vital opportunity to prioritize adaptation and mobilize adequate resources. The promise of $100 billion per year has not been met. There is an urgent need to rebuild trust by rapidly disbursing the billions of dollars needed. We must make every effort to implement the necessary adaptation measures and a fair transition to renewable energy in low-income countries. There is an urgent need to operationalize the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage in order to assist countries and people suffering from the inevitable impacts of change and to mobilize more resources. That is an issue that affects the rights of billions of people. It is an obstacle to development, and it is also an existential threat.
We welcome the adoption of the Pact for the Future and its annexes, the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1). We live in an era of disruptive technological advances and complex challenges. Djibouti is grateful to the United States for having spearheaded the effort that led to the unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 78/311, the first-ever resolution on artificial intelligence, to promote safe, secure and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems for sustainable development.
We in Djibouti are convinced that preparing for the future requires optimizing our country’s human capital as the most sustainable key to economic growth. Like many other African countries, Djibouti’s population is young. Its population is a tremendous asset and a huge competitive advantage if it can be harnessed through investment in skills development and new technologies to promote quality job and workforce competitiveness. We have the ambition to vigorously pursue education systems focused on accessing advanced technological skills.
Djibouti welcomes the progress made by Somalia in its efforts to stabilize the country, as well as the holistic approach developed by the Government of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to deepen peace. We welcome the efforts of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to develop a joint strategic assessment of the situation in Somalia and a draft general concept of operations. We need to intensify discussions to agree on the best financing option for the mission. The mandate given to the mission that will succeed the African Union Transitional Mission in Somalia mission is a robust one. The security threat posed by Al-Shabaab terrorist attacks is a major obstacle to our joint efforts and must be eliminated as soon as possible. The future mission must be guaranteed adequate resources and necessary equipment, including force multipliers. We must fully support the efforts of the Somali Government to reposition itself as a key player in the region. Its term on the Security Council, which will begin next January, will certainly serve as a platform to share the lessons it has learned and the experience it has gained during these decades of conflict.
Djibouti remains concerned about the attacks perpetrated by the Houthis against merchant ships and commercial vessels. They are disturbingly disrupting maritime traffic and trade flows. The crisis has already caused an exponential increase in maritime transport costs, which is reflected in the consumer goods price index. If the situation continues, the impact on the Djiboutian economy, as well as the environmental consequences of those repeated attacks, would be devastating. We call for the identification of solutions that will ease the regional tensions contributing to the deterioration of the situation in the Red Sea and for the intensification of diplomatic efforts to find a favourable outcome to the peace process in Yemen, under the auspices of the United Nations.
We are profoundly alarmed by the continued deterioration of the situation in the Middle East and Gaza, and the West Bank in particular. The violence continues unabated. We are profoundly saddened by the continued loss of lives, in particular those of children in Gaza, the collective punishment of the Palestinian people, the indiscriminate and continued bombings and the unlawful occupation in the form of a total siege. The attack on Lebanon has accelerated the regional conflagration we all feared. We express hope that the parties will agree to the 21-day ceasefire called for by the United States and France. We must at all costs avoid an all-out war.
We welcome resolution ES-10/24, recently adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth emergency special session by an overwhelming majority. The solution demanded by the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Arab Peace Initiative and all the 140 States that already recognize the State of Palestine is the two-State solution. It is the only solution that can lead to lasting peace and security, and it is the very solution that has been blocked by Israel’s defiant insistence on maintaining its occupation of Palestinian territory in perpetuity.
We are troubled by the continued deterioration of the situation in the Sudan, the third-largest African country and a founding member of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD). We are saddened by the tragic loss of lives, the destruction of infrastructure and the devastating humanitarian catastrophe that it has caused. Djibouti, under the leadership of President Guelleh, current Chairman of IGAD, has held many meetings at summit level to explore avenues for a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Djibouti reaffirms its commitment to the territorial integrity, sovereignty, political independence and unity of the Sudan. In line with African Union Peace and Security Council decisions, we underscore the importance of ensuring the protection of the Sudanese State, its institutions and its people. We recently held in Djibouti, in partnership with the United Nations, a retreat of mediators with the ultimate goal of harmonizing the various initiatives aimed at ending the conflict. We call on the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces to honour the commitments made in Jeddah and subsequent negotiations and further urge them to guarantee full, safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access. We call on Sudanese leaders to have the Sudanese people’s best interest at heart. We call on external actors concerned by the conflict in the Sudan and in a position to do so to use their influence and bring constructive pressure to bear on the parties so that they commit to a mediation format, with the ultimate objective of achieving a negotiated settlement of the conflict. We need to act with determination and in unison. We cannot and we must not give up on the prospects of peace in the Sudan.
Djibouti stands ready to complete the normalization process with our neighbour Eritrea and we stand ready to find a negotiated settlement to the conflict on the basis of international law, including the unresolved border dispute and other outstanding issues. The fate of our missing combatants is uppermost in our hearts. Their families need closure.
To conclude, we have made significant commitments at this session. We have adopted the Pact for the Future, a bold and ambitious document that bestows important responsibilities on our Organization, strengthens it and calls for a reformed global governance structure. We have adopted it to reject the return to an older order devoid of justice, where the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they must, where there is no rule of law and might triumphs over right. We did it for our own sake and for the sake of our posterity, because we have no choice but to stand up and stand together to prevent a descent into the morass.
We now have to honour the commitments made. The stakes are high because if we do not, the United Nations will continue to be reduced to a symbolic space where non-binding commitments are made but never implemented.
