The high-level week is a welcome reminder that the vast majority of nations, large and small, seeks global unity and that the division we talk so much about is sought only by the few. That gives me great hope, yet as we open the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly, we cannot close our eyes to the fact that conflicts and war are raging across the world.
It is utterly unacceptable that a permanent member of the Security Council continues to violate the most basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Wars of aggression and altering borders are and should remain things of the past — an imperial practice that has absolutely no place in the twenty-first century. Denmark will continue to stand by Ukraine as long as it takes and to support a just and lasting peace. The Summit on Peace in Ukraine that was held in Switzerland in June clearly showed that there is strong global support for peace based on the United Nations Charter. Therefore, we must all use our influence to further the cause of peace, but it must be a peace that does not reward the aggressor for its brute use of force. Otherwise, we shall set a very bad precedent; otherwise, we shall undermine the very principles on which the United Nations was founded.
Almost a year has passed since Hamas’ horrendous attack on Israel on 7 October 2023. The cruelty and the barbarity we witnessed that day were shocking. I think that none of us is able to really comprehend the shock and trauma that day has caused to Israel and that will forever symbolize the darkest chapter of the country’s history. The terrorism of Hamas sparked a downward spiral of human suffering and regional instability. The humanitarian situation in Gaza is catastrophic and the human suffering unbearable. Hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced all over the region. There is a very real risk of an all-out regional war, which would affect not only the people of the region but all of us.
That must end, and it must end now. A ceasefire is urgently needed. All parties should exercise restraint and contribute to de-escalation, and then we should start thinking about the future — not tomorrow or next week but right now. The current horrible situation may also contain the seeds of a new beginning — a new beginning leading to a just and lasting peace for all, unleashing the potentials of the whole region, allowing everybody to see a future for themselves and their children, and breaking the vicious circle of violence that has lasted much too long.
Such a more promising future can be based only on the two-State solution. We all need to work together to create the conditions for that two-State solution to materialize by building the capacity of the Palestinian Authority to take on the role of a legitimate and effective Government in the future Palestinian State, by stabilizing the West Bank and by starting to prepare right now for the early recovery and reconstruction of Gaza. I call on all parties to make such a development possible, to the benefit of the people of Israel, to the benefit of the people of Palestine and thereby to the benefit of the whole region and the world at large.
We often talk about Ukraine and Gaza in these halls but, sadly, people are dying and suffering in conflicts in many other countries. I am deeply concerned about the continued fighting in the Sudan and the humanitarian consequences for the civilian population. More than 10 million people have been displaced. In the Sudan, there is an urgent need for political dialogue and for putting a halt to the conflict, as there is in Yemen, Haiti, Syria, Afghanistan, Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The list tragically goes on and, in the wake of our collective inability to stop the wars, respect for international law is slowly being undermined.
As a small country, Denmark is conscious that our safety and security depend on the international rule of law. Respect for basic United Nations principles — the sovereign equality, territorial integrity and political independence of all States — is fundamental to international peace and security. As we uphold those principles, respect for human rights and international humanitarian law must be at the core.
Denmark is a strong supporter of the international justice system and of the work and independence of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the International Court of Justice. The International Court of Justice has an important role in the peaceful settlement of disputes, and the ICC is crucial for the global fight against impunity. Without respect for international law, we are looking at a world where might makes right and brute force rules. That is very dangerous.
I began by stating that the vast majority of nations — luckily — seek unity and international cooperation. Earlier this week, we all reaffirmed in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) our commitment to the United Nations Charter and outlined a clear direction towards a transformed system of global governance. The existing system has enabled nations to lift millions of people out of poverty, to eradicate diseases and to advance better education for children around the globe. Those are indeed big achievements, but after almost 80 years of service, that system is in need of a serious update.
It is urgent to reform the international financial architecture. It needs to be more representative and more effective. Denmark supports a stronger representation of African countries in the Bretton Woods institutions. We agree that global financial safety nets must support all countries, including the poorest, when a major crisis hits. That should not be dependent on voluntary donor contributions.
We agree that all countries must be subject on an equal basis to independent, transparent and accurate credit ratings. We agree that we need to find sustainable solutions to the high levels of debt faced by many countries. Debt treatment through the Common Framework needs to be accelerated. All creditors and lenders should act transparently, and concessional financing should be made available. The multilateral development banks have mobilized billions already through reforms, but reforms need to deepen to move from billions to trillions.
Looking forward towards the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development, to be held in Spain next year, the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and beyond, reform tracks must be made tangible. Solutions should be developed not just for the future but also for the present. I therefore wish to take this opportunity to praise Barbados for suggesting concrete actions to help fix some of the more systemic errors of the international financial architecture. We are happy to support the Bridgetown Initiative for the Reform of the Global Financial Architecture, and we are proud to work alongside Barbados on greening international financing. We encourage others, including the United Nations and the international financial institutions, to work together, to be bold and to achieve the necessary progress on reform of the international financial architecture.
While we reform for a more just financial architecture, we need to sustain levels of development assistance to the poorest countries. Commitments made should therefore be honoured. Denmark remains a member of a club that is absolutely far too exclusive — the club of countries that meet the United Nations target of providing 0.7 per cent of our gross national income for official development assistance. It is a good club, but we have too few members, so we invite others to join.
In April, African Heads of State met in Nairobi to call for an ambitious replenishment of the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA). We have decided to respond to that call. Denmark intends to increase our contribution to IDA by 40 per cent. For the IDA21 replenishment, we will contribute with $479 million. We encourage all — be they current or new donors, whether they are big or small — to help us reach an ambitious replenishment.
In June, Denmark was proudly elected to the Security Council for the term 2025–2026. I was present and voting here in the Hall that day (see A/78/PV.86). I wish to thank Member States for their strong show of confidence and support. It will be an honour to serve on the Council. As we look forward to our membership, I cannot help but wish that the Council were in better shape — more accountable, more effective, more transparent and, above all, more inclusive and representative. The world needs a Security Council that reflects the world of today and is able to respond to the security concerns of people all around the globe. To Denmark, it is evident that this calls for an expansion of the Council. We wish to see both more permanent and more elected members, and we wish to limit the use of the veto. Both aspects are long overdue.
Time is of the essence. The year 2030, which once seemed like a distant dot on the horizon, is now only six years away. Yet, only 17 per cent of the Sustainable Development Goals are on track to be realized and we are far from on track to fulfil our climate targets. The accelerating climate crisis must be met with accelerating climate action. We need more ambitious reductions, we need more support for climate change adaptation and we need to speed up and scale up climate financing. No country can solve those global challenges alone, but no country is too small or too big to contribute. Everyone is needed. As a long-standing and dedicated supporter of global cooperation, I can assure Members that Denmark will continue to do our part. We will deliver on promises made and we will push for more ambitious targets and for concrete actions, and we will do so for the present and for the future.
