First of all, on behalf of the Dominican people, I would like to congratulate Mr. Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and to thank him for his work, together with the Secretary-General, on the successful organization of this session and in particular the recently concluded Summit of the Future.
That ambitious effort has emphasized the need to strengthen international financing to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and shows the sincere will to work for a present and a future of peace, citizen well-being and respect for human rights and democratic values. I want to emphasize that, in the case of the Dominican Republic, we have made considerable progress on the SDGs in terms of reducing poverty and improving food security, energy sustainability, citizen security and climate action, to mention but a few examples. As an example, monetary poverty was reduced from 25.8 per cent in 2019 to 23 per cent in 2023, despite the pandemic and the effects of the war, and in the first half of 2024, it fell to 18.9 per cent — the lowest level in our history.
Over the past four years of management, we have more than doubled expenditure on social protection. Our agricultural policy has been key to guaranteeing food security and maintaining the profitability of Dominican producers. Despite being an island with limited arable land resources, we have gone from 88.5 per cent food self-sufficiency in 2019 to 90.6 per cent in 2023. We have largely achieved self-sufficiency in the sector.
In terms of the generation, transmission and distribution of affordable and clean energy, we have made significant progress on and improvements to electricity regulations. We have begun the construction of power plants capable of generating 2,000 new thermal megawatts, with 400 megawatts already being produced, and we have contracted 1,674 megawatts of renewable energy, with 647 megawatts already being produced and power stations capable of generating 1,030 megawatts under construction. By the end of 2027, for the first time, we will have a generation surplus of more than 15 per cent, which will guarantee greater stability and sustainability and better prices for energy supply.
Citizen security has also seen a notable improvement. In 2022, the homicide rate in our country was 13.2 per 100,000 inhabitants; in 2023, it dropped to 11.5, and so far in 2024, it stands at 9.9. That index is below the average for Latin America and the Caribbean, which, according to United Nations data, is 17.2.
We maintain a firm commitment to confronting the triple planetary crisis — climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution — by playing a fundamental role in the creation of the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage and reaching the goal of 30x30 in the protection of our maritime territory. Those crucial issues require our full attention, yet the resurgence of war and rampant violence force us to focus on that unfortunate emergency. Since its adoption in 1945, the Charter of the United Nations has served us well, but after seven decades, a series of threats and challenges have accumulated that today exceed its institutional framework, as Secretary-General Guterres underscored in his opening remarks. There is a general consensus that we urgently need a new model of global governance — one that fosters greater confidence and effectiveness in the decisions emanating from this essential concert of nations.
For the Dominican Republic, a commitment to effective and renewed multilateralism is a priority. That approach is necessary to ensure respect for international law and to protect nations from global threats that compromise their security and well-being. Without concerted and principled action, the foundations of the international community will continue to weaken. Since its creation, the Dominican Republic has been a standard-bearer for peace and the peaceful settlement of conflicts. The loss of thousands of innocent lives of children and the elderly is unacceptable. For that reason, we speak up to vigorously demand the effective protection of the civilian population, in line with the norms of international humanitarian law.
There is a solid theory that posits that democracies rarely go to war against one another. We Dominicans are convinced that the promotion of democracy is essential for the building of a lasting peace. Democracy cannot be reduced to a system of mechanical processes. Democracy has to be a living reality that positively transforms the lives of citizens.
We stand at a crucial juncture for democracy in Latin America and the Caribbean. Over the past few decades, we have borne witness to an alarming deterioration in the quality of and support for democratic systems. According to the recognized public opinion survey Latinobarómetro, support for democracy has declined significantly between 2010 and 2023, while support for authoritarianism increased over that same time period. Multiple factors have led to that decline, including the effects of frequent global economic crises, which have become cyclical since the end of the 1990s. However, another equally important factor is the fact that citizens are not seeing the tangible benefits of democracy and are very concerned about cults of personality and corruption, which undermine trust in democratic institutions.
In the light of that, a clear propensity to remain in power stands out. In the case of Latin America, that has taken the form of indefinite re-election. Over the past 30 years, that trend has burgeoned, eroding democracy. One example of that is the crisis in Venezuela, which combines a concentration of power, the persecution of the opposition and censure of the media. Without the due transparency required in any electoral process and without any supporting documentation, the crisis will only grow worse. We will continue to insist on the publication of all electoral records, their verification by impartial institutions and respect for the results of the popular will in Venezuela. Without the publication of those documents, it will not be possible to declare a legitimate victor.
Transfers of power are essential to guaranteeing a responsible and genuinely participatory political exercise. Democracy is based on a founding principle: the loser has to accept their defeat and exercise a faithful, constructive opposition. Another democratic principle establishes that the winner has an obligation to refrain from bullying or crushing their adversary. Democracy cannot be exercised solely by and for the winners; the majority has to ensure that the minority, which enjoys equal rights and must be treated equitably and justly, is respected and included.
On 19 May, the Dominican people re-elected me in the first round of elections to serve a second and final presidential mandate, also resulting in a qualified majority in both chambers of Congress. With a view to strengthening Dominican democracy, I presented to the Dominican Congress a constitutional reform that will comprehensively limit presidential re-elections to two consecutive terms and no more. That reform aims to leave a legacy of political and social stability to future generations and to establish a general principle that is clear and robust, namely, that power is always transitory and must be at the service of the people.
Every democracy needs to make a commitment to defending human rights. Doing so is fundamental to protecting dignity and the freedom of every individual and to providing legitimacy to political power. The Dominican Government is profoundly committed to protecting human rights at the national and international levels. That commitment is an integral part of our foreign policy, which establishes the promotion and defence of human rights as one of its main pillars. Here, there are neither calculations nor factions, only principles. Consequently, the crisis in Haiti warrants particular attention. For more than three years now, the instability in our neighbouring country has put significant pressure on our own security. We have firmly been asking for the involvement of the international community to assume a leading and sustained role in stabilizing Haiti. That is a strategic need for security in my country and throughout the entire region.
The Dominican State has shouldered a high responsibility in the Haitian crisis, far beyond what should be expected of it, by providing essential services to a large population hailing from our neighbouring country. In 2023, healthcare for Haitian immigrants accounted for 12 per cent of the total medical services provided through our national health system. In addition, there are currently approximately 200,000 foreign minors in the Dominican public education system, of which an estimated 147,000 are of Haitian origin. Those figures reflect the great economic burden on the Dominican Republic and the sense of humanitarian duty it has demonstrated, but we can no longer do it alone.
After a long struggle for the adoption of various resolutions within the Security Council, we finally began to see a path towards stability emerge with the establishment of the Transitional Presidential Council and the arrival of the Multinational Security Support Mission in Haiti. We take this opportunity to express our thanks to Kenya — and President Ruto — which has provided the majority of the personnel supporting the Haitian National Police. We further thank the United States, which has shouldered most of the financial and logistical burden. Likewise, we thank Jamaica, the Bahamas and El Salvador, which have already sent their contributions. In addition, we thank the Caribbean Community for its efforts towards dialogue and cooperation in Haiti. That said, to date, only 400 of the Multinational Security Support Mission troops have been deployed, out of the minimum of 1,000 needed to ensure that the force can be effective. The resources required to fully deploy the force and achieve the goals of pacification and support for the holding, in due course, of free and fair elections have yet to be deposited in the trust fund for Haiti.
We have reached this point with great sacrifices, but practically one year ahead of the holding of elections in Haiti, conditions are still not in place for them to take place. We cannot allow the efforts that have been made to date to fall apart. If that were to happen, Haiti’s collapse would be imminent, with repercussions for the entire region. This mission constitutes an exceptional source of hope for restoring normalcy in Haiti. Failure could force us to take drastic measures to protect our national security. It is unacceptable that at this stage of the game, some of the countries that have had an impact on the Haitian situation or that have committed to resolving it have not fully kept their promises. While my country’s national security is at stake, I will not let up in my demands for stability in Haiti.
The Dominican Republic and the Government that I lead will continue cooperating with the international community in a supportive, committed manner to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The global landscape requires us to act as a cohesive community, a true concert of nations, with a common goal and vision for the future. We will be judged by history, not only for the speeches that we give in these illustrious halls, but also, more importantly, for the actions that we undertake in practice. We cannot fail our peoples. We cannot fail humankind. We cannot fail the future.
