As we meet once again in the halls of our United Nations, our world is at a very delicate, sensitive and dangerous juncture; a juncture marked by the accumulation of conflicts, crises and wars, the widening gap in development disparities between the North and the South, and the exacerbation of climate change and environmental risks of all kinds and forms; a juncture that reveals the magnitude of the shortcomings that have afflicted the collective security system in light of the tendency to resolve disputes by force, the excessive and selective resort to unilateral punitive measures, the failure to fulfil obligations undertaken, the disregard for international legitimacy, the spread of polarization, the accompanying absence of the role of the Security Council and the erosion of multilateral international action as a whole. Last but not least, it is a juncture that puts to the test the entire system of international relations, with its rules, principles and controls codified in the Charter of the United Nations and mechanisms, structures and institutions that rely on it, which were established to serve the aspirations, ambitions and goals that bind our countries.
From that perspective, looking ahead to the eighth decade of the United Nations must be an opportunity to renew our commitment to the international system that unites us, based on the rule of law, not the rule of force, and on the force of law, not the law of force, and on the force of logic, not the logic of force. We need more than ever today to renew our commitment and adherence to the United Nations Charter and the rules of international law, before which we are all equal, and to respect and abide by them.
The ongoing genocidal war in Gaza, which has raged for almost a whole year, and its recent spillover into the West Bank and recently into Lebanon, and the multifaceted Israeli escalation on multiple fronts throughout the region could not have happened if the international community had taken a firm stance at the time, imposing on the Israeli settlement occupation the same measures that have been imposed on others, namely, the punitive and deterrent measures enshrined in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The international community today should hasten to put an end to the hell inflicted on the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and to rein in the Israeli occupier and its desire to plunge the Middle East region into a cycle of crises, conflicts and endless wars.
The international community should also realize that it is facing a critical and pivotal stage in the history of the Palestinian cause, a stage that does not accept a return to the status quo ante; a stage that does not accept hesitation or inaction in supporting the Palestinian national project; a stage that does not tolerate procrastination or delay in supporting the move towards the establishment of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State as a just, lasting and final solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
From this rostrum at the seventy-eighth session (see A/78/PV.5), the President of the Republic, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, appealed to the United Nations to expedite the admission of the State of Palestine to full membership. He did so in the context of less turbulent, crisis-ridden and tragic circumstances in the occupied Palestinian territories and the rest of the Palestinian neighbourhood. Today, as the Palestinian cause is enduring its darkest historical phase ever, that approach has become imperative, urgent and self-evident. The full membership of the State of Palestine in our Organization remains a crucial step towards preserving the two-State solution and addressing all that the Israeli occupation is preparing to thwart. It is a step towards safeguarding the tenets of a resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the foundations of security and stability in the region.
As for developments in our regional neighbourhood, Algeria remains firmly convinced that confronting the complex challenges facing the countries and peoples of the region requires international support and global solidarity to meet the various problems that are weighing heavily on our pan-African space. In the same vein, my country aspires to end colonization by closing the final page on colonialism, which is still regrettably manifest in the Western Sahara. We offer all our support to the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara in their efforts to enable the two parties, the Kingdom of Morocco and the POLISARIO Front, to return to the path of direct negotiations with the aim of reaching a political solution that would guarantee the Sahrawi people the exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination, which is not subject to the statute of limitations. As for those who seek to entrench the colonial status quo by buying time, falsifying damning data and stepping up their desperate manoeuvres to distract attention from the clear truth, we affirm that the phenomenon of colonialism is destined to disappear, no matter how long it takes, and that the legitimate rights of the Sahrawi people will be exercised sooner or later.
As for neighbouring Libya, Algeria calls for the expeditious elimination of the scourge of foreign interventions, which is exhausting that brotherly country’s resources and fuelling divisions and conflicts among its people. Only then can our Libyan brothers come together on a consensus that will begin to achieve the goals off national reconciliation and facilitate the transition towards organizing free, fair and transparent elections, all in the service of the highest goal we desire from the bottom of our hearts, which is the unification of Libya and its people, territory, Government and institutions.
At the continental level, Algeria is pursuing its efforts and endeavours to make a qualitative contribution to comprehensive African action in the light of the priorities that the continental agenda has decisively and unequivocally defined. First and foremost, Africa looks forward to activating African-led solutions and to developing and implementing them to end conflicts and resolve the various crises and disputes afflicting the countries and peoples of the continent.
Secondly, Africa looks forward to addressing economic development and joining the revolutions currently taking place in the fields of artificial intelligence, digitalization and renewable energy.
Thirdly, Africa is looking forward to advancing its strategic priorities that lie at the heart of the reform of the international financial, monetary and banking institutions in order to improve African representation in those institutions, the structural reform of global debt and adequate international financing that is appropriate to the Africa’s development requirements.
Fourthly and finally, Africa is looking forward to correcting the historical injustice imposed on it in the Security Council and being able to occupy its rightful place in that key United Nations organ, complementing its recent accession to the Group of 20 as a permanent member.
With the same commitment at the continental level, Algeria is pursuing its endeavours and efforts to establish a balanced, beneficial and meaningful partnership in the Sahel-Saharan region, which is experiencing fragile conditions as countries endure an aggravation of political unrest, growing terrorist threats, the spread of poverty, the absence of prospects for sustainable development and the exacerbation of the phenomenon of climate change. In the face of those challenges, Algeria reiterates its full solidarity with all countries and peoples of the Sahel-Saharan region and affirms its firm conviction that its security, stability and well-being are an integral part of the security, stability and well-being of the neighbouring African region.
One representative of a State of that region dared to brazenly attack my country with vile language that should not be dignified with a reply and is not befitting of this noble rostrum. My country will not respond to such low, ill-mannered language except with polite, refined language that sincerely reflects its loyalty and devotion to the deep-seated ties that unite it with the countries and peoples of the region, which cannot be shaken by transient circumstantial factors or the trivial concerns of those who stand behind its incitement. My country is resolute and extends its hand to our brothers as we seek to build with them a Sahel that enjoys security, safety and tranquillity.
Today, Algeria is taking firm and solid steps on the right path established by the President of the Republic, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, to strengthen the political and institutional stability of the country, build a strong and diversified national economy, end dependence on the hydrocarbon sector and enhance the social character of the Algerian State as a fixed principle and solid legacy of our glorious revolution of liberation. That approach has yielded its first fruits in strengthening the security and stability of the country, consolidating its democratic path, particularly in the recent presidential elections, and laying the foundations for a comprehensive economic renaissance that has restored our national economy’s position in Africa among the three strongest economies on the continent and opened the door to opportunities for cooperation and profitable partnership for all parties in it.
In the light of those achievements, Algeria is working to strengthen its relations with all sisterly, friendly and partner countries in its neighbourhood and beyond. My country also seeks to continue working closely with all States Members of our Organization that share our commitment to and concern for upholding the principles and values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Although the current situation in our world is difficult and dangerous and is capable of breaking the strongest will and discouraging the most ardent determination, we remain very confident that hope will survive and that ambition will remain. From the heart of crises, opportunities are born; from the womb of suffering, determination is sharpened; and from the heart of adversity, hope shines. We hope from the bottom of our hearts that we will have a better world for current generations and for future generations.
