I begin by conveying the greetings of the President of the Republic of Ecuador, Daniel Noboa Azín, leader of a young Government who has had the courage to break the patterns that prevented the changes demanded by his generation and my country.
Ecuador is a country of 18 million inhabitants with enormous potential, where young people fight every day for a better future, changing the reality they have inherited. They believe in the transformative project that President Noboa has proposed and today they see a country of opportunities and progress, based on respect for human rights and in which there is a firm commitment to banishing corruption and impunity.
Although it may seem that global and multidimensional crises are overwhelming us, international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations must continue to be our compass. Therefore, today I reaffirm Ecuador’s commitment to multilateralism, peace and sustainable development, the peaceful resolution of conflicts and respect for individual freedoms and human rights. I reaffirm, in short, Ecuador’s unwavering commitment to and respect for the ideals and principles that have given life to nations. We must implement the Pact for the Future, the Global Digital Pact and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1), adopted last week. That will help the United Nations to be more than just a photograph taken 79 years ago and to better reflect the reality of the contemporary world.
Ecuador welcomes any initiative that seeks inclusive prosperity and democracy, knowing that its sustainability is closely linked to the peace of a nation because there is an indissoluble link between peace and development and between development and peace. Ecuador is therefore working towards the Sustainable Development Goals and has shown that the long-awaited Goal 16, “Peace, justice and strong institutions”, generates synergies and is intertwined with 125 of the 169 targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We must understand that when we strengthen democracy and institutions, we combat violence in all its forms. By attacking corruption, we achieve greater justice and peace for citizens and generate an impact on the reactivation of the economy, quality employment and the reduction of poverty, hunger and malnutrition.
Building a future of greater prosperity and peace requires combating transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, which undermine institutions and corrode the social fabric of our democracies. In December 2023, President Noboa, within the framework of the Ecuadorian presidency of the Security Council, warned its members about a wave of transnational organized crime and narcoterrorism that threatened the rule of law, State control and border security. Faced with that challenge, my country’s national Government has adopted responsible decisions and is leading the relentless fight that past Governments avoided. However, national actions are not enough in the face of the threat of transnational organized crime, which has resources that far exceed those used to combat it. It is only by deepening our efforts and working in a coordinated and effective manner with the international community that we will be able to defeat it.
As an elected member of the Security Council, Ecuador has demonstrated its commitment to international peace and security. We have risen to the occasion of that historic challenge, which has forced us to act responsibly and consciously in the face of geopolitical tensions among the great Powers that limit the fulfilment of the collective responsibility to act in conflict situations that keep humankind in suspense.
In the case of Ukraine, we are co-authors of the humanitarian file and, with respect to the situation in Palestine, we have voted in favour of all resolutions adopted by the Security Council to end the hostilities, ensure the release of the hostages, allow an adequate flow of humanitarian aid and advocate for respect for international humanitarian law.
In my region, we led the Security Council’s authorization for the deployment of the Multinational Security Support (MSS) mission for Haiti, which was adopted under resolution 2699 (2023) of October 2023 and renewed until 2025 just a few minutes ago. The role of the Caribbean Community has been key in supporting Kenya as the leader of the MSS mission. That first step should help the sister Republic of Haiti find its own path towards peace and sustainable development.
Until the end of our mandate, we will continue to honour the commitment made to the Assembly, which elected us with 190 votes, to promote the strengthening and maintenance of peace; respect for the Charter of the United Nations, prioritizing the peaceful settlement of disputes, diplomacy and dialogue; the protection of civilians as the best way to honour the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions; the fight against transnational organized crime and terrorism; non-proliferation and the fight against illicit arms trafficking; and the women and peace and security agenda to move towards the elimination of obstacles that prevent women from participating and making decisions throughout the cycle of the prevention, building and maintenance of sustainable peace.
Furthermore, I would like to highlight that Ecuador has consistently contributed to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with military personnel in various missions and with support for initiatives that strengthen them, such as the historic Security Council resolution 2719 (2023), which was adopted during our presidency of the Security Council. That resolution paves the way for the sustainable funding of missions requested by the African Union Peace and Security Council.
That brings me to another of the challenges we face in Latin America — the imperative to preserve the rule of law and respect for the will of the people. The escalation of tensions in Venezuela, the systematic violations of human rights, the persecution of political leaders and the daily violent repression by a totalitarian Government of its citizens for claiming the right to have the popular will expressed at the polls respected portend a direct threat to regional stability, with possible repercussions for international peace and security.
The critical humanitarian, economic, political, human rights and security situation in Venezuela has caused 7.7 million people to leave in search of better opportunities. Many have been received in various Latin American nations, including Ecuador, which hosts the largest number of Venezuelans per capita in the region. Faced with the continued deterioration, severity and complexity of the crisis, Ecuador has taken a lead role in favour of the people of Venezuela and will not relent in its insistence before international forums for a peaceful and democratic transition to take place, led by all Venezuelans. The international community must provide a clear and timely response on that path.
Migration is one of the most complex and urgent challenges facing the world. Behind irregular migration operate networks of human trafficking and illicit migrant trafficking that threaten the integrity and lives of millions of people, with unaccompanied minors and women being the most vulnerable. That is intolerable and the fight against it requires joint and coordinated actions with a comprehensive approach. Ecuador experiences all dimensions of migration; we are a country of origin, destination, transit, return and even refuge. We therefore advocate for safe, orderly and regular migration in all areas of human mobility, which requires the determined support of the international community, which must be clear that it has to be achieved without criminalization.
The international community must also face the devastating effects of climate change together. Ecuador is suffering its worst drought in recent decades, highlighting the importance of caring for our ecosystems and investing in infrastructure to do so. As a megadiverse country with unique and fragile ecosystems, such as the Amazon, the Andes and the Galapagos islands, we are committed to the conservation of biodiversity. We are updating our National Biodiversity Strategy and have launched an ecological transition policy that preserves our natural heritage. Those efforts require greater co-responsibility from the international community, particularly in terms of financing, technology transfer, capacity-building and scientific research, which are currently insufficient and inadequate. The Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the principle of shared but differentiated responsibilities cannot be undermined. They must be strengthened.
Ecuador also supports initiatives for the protection, conservation and sustainable use of the ocean, such as the prompt entry into force of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, and the holding of the third United Nations Conference on Oceans in 2025. Our commitment is also reflected in the efforts made by the Ecuadorian presidency of the Committee in charge of developing a legally binding instrument to eliminate plastics pollution. We hope that this objective will be achieved soon and that the Galapagos, a Natural Heritage Site, will be the venue for the signing of that instrument.
Security, transnational organized crime and climate change are some of the challenges we face as human beings and that require greater use of global mechanisms for cooperation and development financing. Ecuador is convinced of the need for a true transformation of global governance and its institutions in order to provide them with legitimacy and thereby avoid their condemnation to sterility and irrelevance. That includes the Bretton Woods institutions and this very Organization.
The improvement of the organs of the United Nations system is not the ultimate objective, but rather a step towards achieving the greater objective of peace and security in the world. Therefore, taking the relationship between the main organs into account, if we are to have a stronger and more effective Security Council, we also need a more modern and efficient General Assembly. We must reaffirm the central role of the General Assembly while the necessary reform of the Security Council is taking place. Ecuador clearly understands that it is a non-permanent member of the Council whose term ends in December 2024, and it also knows that the role of elected members, when they act together, is critical. We must continue working along those lines.
One essential component of the transformation is the participation of women in leadership positions. Ecuador reaffirms its support for a woman from the Latin American and Caribbean region to be the next Secretary-General.
I conclude by recalling that crises are overcome with political resolve, will and courage to make the right decisions. That will be achieved by strengthening multilateralism, not by weakening it. In that way, we will be able to achieve the dreams of a more just, peaceful world with opportunities for all.
