I address the General Assembly from this rostrum at a critical moment and amid complex crises that are sweeping the Middle East and the world. I am here to share Egypt’s vision — one rooted in history yet focused on the future; a vision has overcome challenges and wars and embraced the path of peace, justice and constructive action to build a region and a world that accommodate everyone with freedom and dignity.
I address the Assembly on behalf of a founding nation of the United Nations, one known for building bridges, forging international consensus and defending Arab, African and global interests. We firmly believe in the importance of preserving an effective multilateral system to build stable international relations based on respect for international law and spreading peace and cooperation.
From that perspective, we find it necessary to sound the alarm over the current international circumstances. The international system that was established nearly eight decades ago is now suffering a fundamental defect that may lead to its erosion and threaten its survival through ineffectiveness, inequality and double standards. Young people around the world are raising legitimate questions about the multilateral system’s relevance to modern life. Does it provide us with security? Does it help us to address poverty and hunger? Does it protect against the risks of climate change? Does it prepare them for technological challenges? Does it intervene to save them in the face of occupation, terrorism, killing and destruction? Does it apply common and transparent standards and the same measure to all issues?
In the light of those and similar legitimate questions that were raised during the preparations for the Summit of the Future, and of the positive outcomes that the Summit attained — and which we welcome for helping to restore the vitality and effectiveness of the multilateral system, with the United Nations at its heart — allow me to outline a specific vision for restoring confidence and credibility, confronting double standards, further activating the United Nations system and enhancing its ability to build a better future for our peoples through five basic principles, as follows.
First, while acknowledging that there is no alternative to the multilateral international system and that the intertwined and cross-border challenges of our world exceed the capabilities of any single State or group of States to confront them, we must recognize that the integrity and, hence, the legitimacy and very survival of the United Nations are at stake.
The ongoing Israeli aggression on Gaza over the past year and the ongoing hostilities in the West Bank are real a stain on the international community and its institutions, which are unable to do the bare minimum to stop the aggression and took months before they even began demanding an end to the aggression. We condemn the dangerous, unrestrained Israeli escalation, which is dragging the region to the brink of the abyss, We categorically reject the current Israeli aggression against Lebanon, which constitutes a flagrant violation of its sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and political independence.
Our top priority now is to stop the bloodbath immediately, permanently and without delay, and to stand with the utmost resolve against any attempt to Zionize the Palestinian cause through forced displacement or population replacement policies. We attach particular importance to the unconditional and immediate delivery of medical and humanitarian assistance to defenceless civilians in Gaza. Egypt has made intensive mediation efforts, in cooperation with our brothers in Qatar and the United States, but Israel has thwarted those efforts over the course of several months. We reiterate that the establishment of a unified Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, remains the only way to achieve a just and comprehensive solution that restores stability to the region and the world. That issue lies at the very heart of the conflict in the region.
I cannot fail to commend the courageous positions of the Secretary-General and other United Nations leaders and agencies, in particular the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We also offer our condolences for the deaths of the Agency’s martyrs and those of other United Nations agencies that have been struck down by the bullets of the Israeli occupation while shouldering their responsibilities and their duty to defend international law and to stop the killing and destruction machine.
Secondly, effective participation in international decision-making, as opposed to mere lip service, is critical. Participation is not a gift or a favour from some countries towards others. Rather, it is the basis and guarantee for the international community to respond effectively to the successive crises facing the international system and to ensure joint ownership of international decisions. Moreover, we cannot accept that Africa and the Arab countries remain without permanent representation in the Security Council, with all its prerogatives. Egypt endorses the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration to remedy the historical injustice inflicted on our African continent.
It is not possible to talk about true participation without a radical reform of the global financial architecture and international financing institutions, including by updating the policies and practices of the multilateral development banks and providing soft financing to support developing countries in facing the repercussions of international crises. I affirm Egypt’s support for the Secretary-General’s appeal to make the Bretton Woods institutions more just and equitable for the benefit of developing countries.
There is no alternative to a comprehensive approach to address the problem of the growing sovereign debt of developing countries by enhancing the effectiveness of existing mechanisms and creating new mechanisms for the sustainable management of the debts of low- and middle-income countries, in addition to expanding the conclusion of debt swap agreements, which contribute to transforming the debt challenge into opportunities to achieve sustainable development.
Economic justice will not be achieved without giving priority to development in Africa, as advancing development is a guarantee to prevent conflicts and achieve sustainable peace. Through our current chairmanship of the Steering Committee of Heads of State and Government of the African Union Development Agency and its leadership of post-conflict reconstruction issues in the African continent, Egypt will seek to advance development in order to achieve the African Union Agenda 2063.
Thirdly, the way to transform the resource gap among countries into a comparative advantage to achieve integration and cooperation, instead of fuelling disparities and deepening the gap between societies, is by promoting the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, particularly in addressing climate change and the governance of scarce natural resources on our planet.
The cornerstone for raising the levels of climate pledges is directly linked to the form and extent of international support in terms of financing and advanced technological capabilities to implement climate action at the national level. National ownership of projects and actions ensures compatibility between domestic priorities and the Sustainable Development Goals, achieves integration among the environmental, economic and social dimensions, and ensures that a just transition does not impede the right to development or the eradication of poverty. That was precisely the essence of our priorities at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Sharm El-Sheikh, and it is the guiding light for our relentless efforts to reach effective and practical outcomes, most notably an agreement on a mechanism for financing losses and damages to assist developing countries most vulnerable to climate change.
Fourthly, the principle of participation and shared responsibility necessarily goes hand-in-hand with rejecting a unilateral approach to managing international resource issues and settling disputes that arise in that regard. That naturally applies to the issue of managing transboundary international waterways, especially in the light of the global water crisis, which is having particular repercussions in Egypt.
Egypt is a densely populated country with an arid desert environment and depends almost exclusively on the Nile River to meet its renewable water resources. The principle of cooperation with our Nile basin brother countries represents the cornerstone of the Egyptian approach to identifying the best ways to manage our shared water resources in a way that benefits all, in accordance with the rules of international law, and to achieve fair and reasonable use without causing significant harm to downstream countries. We have sought and continue to seek to attract international investments for development projects consistent with the rules of international law in the Nile basin countries.
Despite Egypt’s sincere efforts, Ethiopia has insisted on adopting a policy of procrastination, intransigence, distorting facts and trying to impose a fait accompli by constructing and operating the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, in violation of the rules of international law and without regard to its impact on the lives of millions in Egypt and the Sudan, the downstream countries. After 13 years of fruitless negotiations and in the light of ongoing unilateral Ethiopian measures in flagrant violation of international law — especially the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam Project and the 2021 Security Council presidential statement S/PRST/2021/18 — the negotiations ended in December 2023. Egypt will continue to closely monitor developments in the process of filling and operating the Ethiopian dam, reserving all its rights under the Charter to take all necessary measures to defend the interests and survival of its people. It is a mistake for anyone to imagine that Egypt will turn a blind eye or tolerate an existential threat to its survival.
Fifthly, the welcome role that the United Nations is trying to play in confronting emerging challenges, such as digital cooperation, crime, cybersecurity and artificial intelligence, should not make us forget the challenges related to the failure of the collective security system in the light of the inability of the United Nations system to implement its primary mission and even the justification for its establishment, the maintenance of international peace and security.
The collective security system, including the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation system, is at risk. The direct or implicit threat of the use of nuclear weapons is no longer a dark fantasy but has become a direct threat, as we have seen on a daily basis in the ongoing war in Gaza and the efforts of nuclear States to update their arsenals, hinting at the possibility of using nuclear weapons without taking serious steps to reach a world free of nuclear weapons, achieve the universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) or establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, in accordance with the decisions of the review conferences of the parties to the NPT, most notably the Middle East decision of 1995.
No regions of the world are more affected by the growing imbalance in the collective security system than Africa and the Middle East. It is both striking and unfortunate to see an increase in Security Council resolutions on humanitarian operations, in parallel with the Council’s gross inability to assume its responsibilities for ending the scourge of conflicts, opting instead merely to treat its humanitarian symptoms, which Mr. Guterres has described as the United Nations becoming a babysitter for conflicts.
The turbulent conflict environment directly surrounding the Egyptian State and throughout our strategic areas, from the Mediterranean in the north to the Horn of Africa in the south, makes us more eager to enhance the role of the United Nations in addressing the root causes of conflicts in an integrated process, from peacekeeping to building and sustaining peace. That can be done only by preserving the unity of the national State, its territorial integrity and the unity of its institutions, and national ownership of solutions free of external interventions and dictates. That is the key to the Egyptian approach to all the crises in the region, from Libya to Syria and the Sudan to Somalia. The solution is always, and in all crises, a comprehensive political process that reunifies the institutions of the national State and confronts attempts to create political and security vacuums that are then filled by sectarian and political militias or exploited by regional or international parties or non-State parties that are greedy to extend their influence at the expense of the countries and peoples of the region.
Egypt stresses the need to support a comprehensive political process to resolve the Sudanese crisis on the basis of respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Sudan and preserving the institutions of the national State. Egypt supports the political solution in Libya, in accordance with the principle of national ownership, and the importance of following up the transitional phase by holding simultaneous presidential and parliamentary elections as soon as possible. Egypt also calls for concerted international efforts to activate the new African peacekeeping mission in Somalia, in line with the vision of the Somali people and Government to preserve its security and stability. Egypt condemns all unilateral measures that affect the unity of Somalia and its sovereignty over all its territories.
Egypt also gives special priority to providing capacity-building programmes in brotherly African countries, in cooperation with the United Nations, through the activities of the Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding and the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development. Egypt is firmly committed to working diligently with all our regional and international partners to restore equality, confront double standards and political hypocrisy, and revitalize the United Nations system in accordance with the principles and purposes of the Charter.
Egypt will also continue to shoulder its responsibility in the humanitarian response to the crises engulfing our regional environment, which made Egypt the world’s third-largest recipient country of asylum requests in 2023. While the generous Egyptian people continue to bear the largest burden of support for our brothers from Arab and African countries, Egypt currently hosts more than 10 million refugees and guests. There are limits to the burdens that Egypt can bear, and the international community is certainly responsible for providing full support to fill the funding gaps and mobilize the necessary resources to meet the needs of humanitarian operations and the requirements of refugees from the countries suffering from conflicts.
Finally, despite the challenges imposed by the successive ongoing global economic crises and their exacerbation by the steady increase in the number of incoming migrants, Egypt is steadily advancing on the path of building its human capital, proceeding from the outcome of the national dialogue to strengthen human rights and democracy, not to please any external party but to address the rights and aspirations of the Egyptian people, the role of youth and the empowerment of women in Egypt. We would like to emphasize once again that we have also completed the development of the first national action plan on the women and peace and security agenda. We will move forward in the implementation of the national strategy for human rights. We will continue to work to build peace and enhance stability in our region and the world, inspired by the values of a great Egyptian civilization rooted in history, armed with the minds of promising young people capable of shaping the future, and calling for respect for the sanctity of human life without discrimination based on colour, gender or religion and adhering to the justice of the international multilateral system.
