Allow me to join previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
The current session is taking place at a crucial juncture of transition in the architecture of global governance. Before I delve into the main subject, allow me to digress a bit and dwell on some historical perspectives.
As will be recalled, the maintenance of global peace was indeed the overarching mantra and proclaimed objective when the League of Nations was established one century ago in January 1920, in the immediate aftermath of the First World War. However, in spite of the lofty pronounced objectives, the League of Nations could not fully measure up to its noble task or deter the eruption of the Second World War.
Twenty-five years later, in October 1945, the United Nations was solemnly established to prevent another world war and guarantee durable global peace, but yet again our global community was plunged into the era of the Cold War, whose hallmark was a confrontational, bipolar international world order. With all its dynamics and deleterious consequences for global peace and stability, the Cold War era culminated, after 45 years, in the collapse of the former Soviet bloc in 1991. As it happened, that later phase ushered in a new, precarious epoch of a unipolar world order, which was in essence bereft of any new ideology. As a matter of fact, the new dispensation represented a retrograde relapse into and revival of centuries-old colonialism and slavery. Indeed, the resources and wealth of others were usurped to mollify the insatiable greed of the few through force and other tools of repression.
The manifestations of that policy are myriad and include pronounced policies of containment by the architects and proponents of a unipolar world order in the European theatre and especially reckless acts in Ukraine; provocative containment policies against China, pursued in Asia for analogous objectives and considerations; and trends that those policies portend for global peace. In our neighbourhood, the ramifications of that policy include the perilous war unleashed to stifle the Palestinians’ cause and evict them from their land; the chaos that it continues to engender and the wider regional conflagration that it may trigger; acts of subversion conducted and multiple crises fomented in several parts in Africa, under various pretexts, to preserve and maintain colonial slavery; overt interventions carried out in the same manner in Latin America to install surrogate regimes; various subterfuges conducted to stifle and roll back burgeoning public protests in Europe and the United States against the backdrop of fragmentation of traditional coalitions. All those distressing developments and trends amplify the innate flaws and dysfunctionality of the reckless policies of the unipolar world order.
Efforts exerted during the various epochs to imbue an institutional structure and mandate into the global architecture were not ultimate aims and objectives in themselves. It is clear that institutional formats are mere mechanisms and modalities for achieving desired goals and objectives. Peace and stability are indispensable prerequisites for the promotion of prosperity and growth and the attainment of the ultimate human aspirations of justice and the prevalence of a just political order — in other words, the assertion and guaranteeing of a just global order where domination, deceit, coercion and intimidation, plunder and monopolization are not countenanced or tolerated. The unequivocal aspirations of the peoples of the world over the past 100 years have been, precisely, the crystallization — through the League of Nations and later the United Nations — of a just global order.
The perplexing question remains whether those lofty aspirations and profound wishes were achieved. The poignant answer is: No, they have not been realized. On the other hand, the logical corollary to failure is not despondency but redoubled and more vigorous commitment and resilience in order to achieve the cherished objectives and goals.
Allow me now to revert to the predicament of the Eritrean people, which epitomizes in all respects the typical ordeal of numerous other peoples.
Three generations of Eritreans were doomed to make precious and inordinately huge sacrifices for almost 80 years following the end of the Second World War, merely because the Dulles brothers determined that Eritrea did not serve the United States strategic interests. As it happened, the people of Eritrea were compelled to wage a political and armed struggle of liberation for 50 long years, and even when they achieved their hard-won independence in 1991 they were denied respite and the opportunity to funnel their energies into nation-building. Indeed, the same hegemonic policy considerations and defunct ploys were ramped up to foment unremitting crises and instability by instigating border conflicts and other ruses. The suffering and economic damage that ensued and the opportunity loss that was incurred have been enormous by any standard.
Still, and in the face of unwarranted onslaught, the resilience of the Eritrean people was not dampened. And yet, the spiral of mindless hostility continued to intensify without let-up. In 2009, Eritrea was subjected to sanctions on the basis of unsubstantiated and trumped-up charges. As it happened, the forces of hegemony plotted to further punish the people of Eritrea and invoked a preposterous pretext for a people and country that have waged a relentless struggle against terrorism and domination for decades. The sanctions were ultimately lifted in 2018, but the question remains: Why were they imposed in the first place? Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that illicit unilateral sanctions, futile demonization campaigns and subversive acts to instigate conflicts in the region continue unabated.
The ordeal meted out to the people of Eritrea is only the tip of the iceberg. The tribulations imposed on other peoples in Africa, Latin America, Asia, Europe and the Americas are severe indeed. In the event, we urge the categorical lifting of the unilateral coercive measures and sanctions imposed on countries like Eritrea, Zimbabwe, Venezuela and Cuba, including the 60-year embargo against Cuba and its unjust placement on the dubious list of State sponsors of terrorism.
Meanwhile, we need to pause and ask: What is the relevance and impact of the fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations against the backdrop of the law of the jungle that the hegemonic Powers are bent on imposing? That precarious reality amplifies the imperative and urgent need for the peoples of the world to strive with higher vigour, fortitude and enhanced solidarity than what has been seen for 100 years to install a global order that guarantees peace and stability. That is not an option that can be left to circumstance. The forces of hegemony must also be held accountable for their crimes for the dispensation of justice.
Let me conclude my brief address by reiterating our best wishes for success in our current endeavours.
