I speak on behalf of a country committed to the values that this institution embodies and to an international order based on the norms and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Spain is a country that believes in international accountability mechanisms and that fights against impunity based on the value of experience and historical memory; a defender of institutions such as the International Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court, which are essential to peace, security, justice and reparation for victims; a country that practices and conducts itself on the basis of a fundamental maxim — the value of coherence — that leads us to say the same with respect to Ukraine, Gaza and anywhere else: defence of peace, human rights and an international order based on rules; and that, in the face of the doubts of others, responds with greater confidence in multilateralism.
The same multilateral system that the world raised piece by piece from the ashes of barbarism is today under enormous pressure that has a direct impact on three essential aspirations for the progress of nations: peace, democracy and development. Those three aspirations are unattainable separately, one without the other. Peace is incompatible with tyranny. Democracy, in turn, needs to provide well-being and development to legitimize itself as what it is — the most advanced form of social and political organization that humankind has ever create. Peace without democracy is the peace of prisons. Democracy without development or progress is the prelude to autocracy, as evidenced by a past rich in lessons that we should never forget. Actively working for peace — the first of those three aspirations — is today much more than a moral requirement. It is an existential necessity.
For the first time in two decades, the number of conflicts is growing. The number of countries involved in wars outside their borders is growing at levels unprecedented since 1945. The number of victims, wounded, mutilated and displaced persons is increasing, as is the economic impact of violence, now up to 13 per cent of the world’s gross domestic product, according to some studies. That is the equivalent of all the wealth created in one year by 180 countries together. Those figures not only give voice to a great collective failure; they are the confirmation of a global disease that corrodes both the foundations of the multilateral system and those of an international order based on principles and norms. Until recently, those principles — respect for the sovereignty, political independence and the territorial integrity of countries — had seemed inviolable.
It is happening in Ukraine at this hour, as we speak here. It is 31 months since the beginning of an aggression that Putin’s Russia is directing not only against the Ukrainian people, but against the entire international community — an aggression that should not continue for one more day. The recent Summit on Peace in Ukraine, held in Switzerland, has, in my opinion, laid the foundations for building a just and lasting peace, in compliance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations, as proclaimed in President Zelenskyy’s peace formula. I invite all countries that have not yet done so to join that initiative and to work on the next step — the recovery and reconstruction of Ukraine. This year, Spain will increase humanitarian and demining funding to €14 million and in 2025 Spanish cooperation will incorporate a specific line item on recovery and reconstruction, focused on health, energy and water in Ukraine.
It is happening in Palestine, where for almost a year we have witnessed an unbearable spiral of death and devastation that, unfortunately, has already spread to Lebanon. That represents an escalation of the conflict of the utmost gravity. Spain once again strongly condemns the death of innocent civilians and I therefore make a new call for de-escalation, détente and diplomacy. International law and international humanitarian law must be respected. Only by ending the war in Gaza and addressing the root causes of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will we be able to successfully resolve the remaining hotbeds of instability in a region of great importance to world stability.
Everything we are seeing every day in Gaza, and now in Lebanon, makes us reflect on the validity of international humanitarian law itself, precisely as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. Spain will continue to devote all its efforts to humanitarian aid to the population, with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East as a key player on the ground. However, all that will be insufficient without a ceasefire. I call again for a ceasefire, for the release of all hostages and for access to humanitarian aid.
In any case, the evidence is overwhelming that we cannot return to the prior situation. It is imperative and urgent to implement the two-State solution of Israel and Palestine living side-by-side in peace and security. That is the only possible solution to a conflict that has lasted for decades and claimed so many innocent lives. In addition, the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice, requested by the General Assembly, has established the illegality of the occupation of the Palestinian territories, which must end immediately.
It is time to work on the stabilization phase, which can be carried out only by the Government of the Palestinian Authority, which Spain is committed to and determined to support and strengthen. Spain made the decision to recognize the State of Palestine on 28 May. It is a decision endorsed by the vast majority of Spanish society and that seeks only to contribute to the search for peace in the region — an aspiration that comes from very far away.
In 1949, a Spaniard, Pablo de Azcárate, served as the first representative of the United Nations mediator in Palestine. Even today it is moving to read his notes on that mission, full of bitterness in the face of the catastrophe he foresaw. Azcárate was an exile, a Spanish republican who was prevented from returning to his homeland by the dictatorship. Perhaps that is why he empathized like no one else with the suffering of that land. His figure today deserves to be vindicated in this house, 75 years after those events.
Before the end of the year, Spain and Palestine will hold the first intergovernmental meeting to broaden and deepen our bilateral relationship. I would also like to highlight the importance of the recent meeting in Madrid of the Euro-Arab/Islamic Group to promote the peace process and materialize the two-State solution. There is an urgent need to hold a peace conference with the parties and the international community, supported today by more than 90 countries. That peace conference will restore the spirit of dialogue that Madrid enjoyed in the early 1990s, when Israelis and Palestinians sat at the same table to negotiate.
In a context as complex as this, I would like to reaffirm Spain’s commitment and unconditional contribution, as demonstrated by the nearly 670 Spanish troops deployed in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon under the command of a Spanish general. The work of peacekeeping missions is instrumental in many other scenarios, such as that of the Western Sahara, where my country, Spain, will continue to support the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General in seeking a mutually acceptable solution within the framework of the United Nations.
But it is clear that, beyond peacekeeping missions, we must address the underlying causes of conflicts, as indicated by the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace, which Spain firmly supports. In that sense, the Indo-Pacific has become a centre of gravity and we must all contribute to maintaining peace in the area and demand respect for the basic principles of international law, such as freedom of navigation at sea. Spain is willing to collaborate to maintain stability and security there.
Although that turbulent panorama can lure us into discouragement, we can look to the European project as an example of hope. No one would have imagined that in just a few decades, the geopolitical panorama in Europe would change so radically. And that is why, as part of the European Union, Spain is committed to that peace agenda. In December 2020, Spain and the United Kingdom reached a bilateral understanding regarding Gibraltar, an issue of great importance to Spain, within the framework of the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union. We have continued to work intensively since then, now with the new British Government, to ensure that the understanding lays the foundations for a future relationship between the territory and the European Union, trusting that an agreement between the European Union and the United Kingdom regarding Gibraltar can be reached as soon as possible. The agreement, in Spain’s opinion, must be fully respectful of the United Nations doctrine on the territory, with which Spain fully aligns itself. It must also be respectful of my country’s legal position with respect to sovereignty and jurisdiction in relation to it. We wish to work for the development of a prosperous, social and economic area that encompasses the entire Gibraltar area and the Campo de Gibraltar.
Along with threats to peace, the world faces a real risk of a decline in democracy. That is the second aspiration I wish to refer to. Rights that were believed to be consolidated are today questioned or reversed. A global reactionary agenda is making headway in the heat of distrust in institutions, polarization and the vindication of an invented past, as false as its proclamations. Democracy is fighting a battle for its survival and let us be clear — it continues to give ground to its enemies. Democracy cannot aspire to win that battle with one hand tied behind its back.
That is because democracies are up against unscrupulous people, activists of lies, hoaxes and hatred, willing to split societies in two to impose their regressive agenda. It is essential to raise a shield to protect democratic institutions from those who seek to deliberately undermine them. It is no longer enough to proclaim the moral superiority of democracy; it is necessary to acknowledge errors and work for its internal regeneration, for example, by strengthening transparency and accountability and making citizens feel democracy as something close, as something of their own, as something alive. Spain will promote that vision through our co-presidency of the Open Government Partnership, which will hold its ninth Global Summit in October next year in Vitoria-Gasteiz.
In such a context, I believe, the relationship between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean assumes a renewed significant. They are two regions that are called to work together with a shared vision of the world.
Unfortunately, the situation in Venezuela, following the elections of 28 July, is extremely worrisome. I want to reiterate once again Spain’s unwavering commitment to democracy and the defence of human rights in that country and to condemn any arrest of or threat against political leaders. It is imperative to respect the will of the Venezuelan people through a recount of the election results in conditions of total transparency and verification. I am convinced that we need more common spaces for dialogue. That is why Spain supports the holding of the next Ibero-American Summit in November in Cuenca, Ecuador, and will host the thirtieth Ibero-American Summit in 2026.
Spain will also continue to practice a feminist foreign policy for the sake of consistency and because, above all, to talk about feminism is to talk about human rights. Today, I want to say loud and clear that the time has come. The post of Secretary-General and the presidency of the Assembly, in the next renewal of those positions, must finally fall to women. Spain firmly supports and will support the alternation of gender in the Organization and will work to put an end to a simply unacceptable situation.
If peace and democracy are to prevail, it is essential to promote the third aspiration I referred to earlier — the sustainable development agenda. Democracy, like peace, is legitimized by its results — its capacity to provide well-being and security, to combat inequalities in all their forms, to ensure social justice and to promote the dignity of the human being. But it is not only about covering material needs in the present; it is about doing so without compromising the capacity of future generations to satisfy their own. It is about our sons and daughters and grandchildren. It is about linking development and sustainability as an existential necessity, not just as a moral requirement.
I am not going to make a fatalistic speech about the climate emergency. We all know its impact, for example, in the increase in migratory flows and the cost of doing nothing, but I refuse to fall into the state of melancholy or resignation of someone who has given up the battle as lost. I will not do so. Science is the answer. Science puts the human being at the centre of its concerns and reminds us that there is only one alternative: eliminating fossil fuels, more renewable energy and more energy efficiency. If we follow that road map, there is not only light at the end of the tunnel, but there are also great opportunities for development and substantial improvements in global competitiveness.
I know that from my own experience. More than half of the electricity my country produced last year came from renewable sources. At this point in the year, that volume exceeds 60 per cent. Behind those figures there is much more than clean, cheap and accessible energy for millions of homes. There are more and better jobs in emerging sectors and more opportunity in industrial fields. That is why it is so important to strengthen international development financing and make it a real lever for prosperity for the countries that need it. Spain is a country that knows that in order for its 48 million inhabitants to be able to aspire to a better future, we have to work so that the 8 billion inhabitants of our planet have a decent life.
We have spaces from which to act to achieve a profound reform and updating of the international financial institutions and multilateral development banks. But I believe that we must go further. It is imperative to move towards fairer and more inclusive mechanisms, address the debt problem, mobilize more sources of financing and, ultimately, guarantee more help to those who need it most. We must implement more effective, transparent and fair tax policies that promote the mobilization of domestic resources, including a global minimum tax on large fortunes and the full implementation of the two pillars of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Group of 20 on the taxation of multinationals as a basis for a future framework convention on tax cooperation.
We will have the opportunity to make progress at the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development, which we will have the great honour and pride of hosting in the city of Seville in June 2025. All are invited. It will be a key event to demonstrate that we are capable of updating our multilateral system to meet the demands of today’s challenges, and a unique opportunity to accelerate the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, to which Spain is committed, including in combating poverty, ending hunger, eradicating AIDS and ending discrimination against women and girls, among many other objectives.
It is hard to believe, but even today we hear delirious speeches that criticize such noble goals and see ideological impositions where there is nothing but common sense and humanity. Such speeches label the clearly humane 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a construction of globalist elites. That is the madness of the times we live in. Spain will be a voice of common sense and work to ensure that the negotiation process is transparent and inclusive, promoting consensus to achieve tangible results. We will put on the table the value of our recent experience in the reform of the development cooperation system and with the objective, which I want to make public today, of increasing our contribution to the United Nations system by at least 25 per cent for the period 2025 to 2027.
In that vision, Africa logically occupies a preferential place for Spain. I am convinced that it should also occupy the same place for the entire international community, not only because of its status as an essential partner in facing great challenges, but also because there are no more excuses. The time has come for the African continent to occupy the place it deserves. That is the spirit that drives our new strategy for Africa. It is not only about strengthening ties with the countries of the region, but also about assuming that our prosperity, security and progress are closely linked to the prosperity, security and inclusive progress of the entire region.
I shall conclude by making two observations. The first is that humankind faces old challenges such as those I have briefly mentioned. But new ones, such as the expansion of artificial intelligence are also emerging. As so often in the past, the emergence of a disruptive advance generates fear and mistrust. This is not the first time. The discovery of writing, some said, would liquidate knowledge through memory. The printing press would limit the depth of thought. Even electricity was seen as a silent killer of the peace of the home. All disruption is overwhelming. What makes the difference is our ability to harness the reins of progress and to combine progress with an ethic that is essential in that great leap that will undoubtedly change the world.
A few days ago, we learned about the seven key recommendations of the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence. We must support those recommendations and move forward with that common effort so as to ensure that decisions about artificial intelligence are not left in the hands of a few and that its development is carried out in an ethical and responsible manner for the benefit of all humankind.
In the face of the apostles of disaster who are always with us, the data tell us that we know how to do it. This is my second observation. In just over half a century, global infant mortality has been reduced from 50 per cent to 4 per cent. The number of university students has doubled in just two decades. The presence of women with seats in parliament is now at 27 per cent, double that of 1990. The world has doubled the prevalence of installed solar power in four years, while the energy produced by fossil fuels has been drastically reduced year after year.
Let us therefore not accept the beginning of a new era of violence and wars as inevitable. The future is a relatively recent conquest for humankind. Having the ability to look ahead, set priorities and think about the future is a privilege that modernity has given us. Let us honour that task by looking to the horizon without fear and with hope. Let us commit to a refoundation of a multilateralism that will allow us to leave a much better future than our present to our sons and daughters. Let us do so with creativity, with audacity, with enthusiasm and with the ambition that our times demand.
