I want to live in a world that is at peace, in a world that is not destroying itself, where proud sovereign nations, large or small, old or young, modern or traditional, are not conquered and colonized. I want to live in a world where everybody can feel free, where artificial intelligence serves rather than hinders humanity and where nobody has to fear oppression based on gender, race, nation, beliefs or one’s thoughts. I want to live in a world that is fit for freedom because freedom paves the way for lasting solutions and prosperity, and because freedom is the core of humanity.
Do we all not want this too? Regrettably, peace and freedom are under threat. The latest survey by Freedom House, in 2023, proved that global freedom declined for the eighteenth consecutive year. The number of those countries where political rights and civil liberties are diminishing is more than twice the number of those countries where rights, liberties and freedom are improving.
Unfortunately, peace and freedom are words that are blatantly misused. Too often we see that the one promising peace and freedom brings oppression and suffering instead. The weaker the mechanisms we have to protect international law, the bigger the threat to the way most of us want to live. We may keep condemning brutal acts of violence, and we may even strongly condemn atrocities, but without effective acts to counter violence, history will condemn us, and it will condemn us strongly.
But it is not our place in history that we have to worry about. Something else keeps us awake at night: the children whom we have lost to conflicts, who will not live long enough to see a high school diploma, who will never have the chance to learn how to ride a bike, who will never dance in the desert, who will not be free, who will not be sharing a smile.
The happiness of a child is priceless. The image of a happy child should cause us to correct our moral compass —personally, globally, strategically and tactically. The image of a happy child will come to life everywhere in the world — on the shores of the Gulf of Aden, the Azov Sea, the Bay of Bengal, the Dead Sea, the Caspian Sea, Lake Tanganyika, the Yellow Sea — when the universally shared rules prevail, when international law is respected, when the United Nations Charter is applied.
We therefore have no option other than to adjust the United Nations system so that it lives up to the demands and necessities of the twenty-first century. That means reinforcing the United Nations Charter. Restoring the credibility of the United Nations and reforming the Organization should grant a better and more efficient application of the Charter so that peace and security is maintained in everyone’s interest and everywhere in the world.
The need to reform the United Nations and its Security Council has been discussed for decades. I am convinced that, now more than ever, the renewal and strengthening of the multilateral world order with the United Nations Charter at its core is in the interest of all of us.
The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which we adopted at the Summit of the Future just a few days ago (see A/79/PV.3), is a good start. It can guide us on the way forward. We must now implement all that we have pledged in the Pact. In fact, we should have been even more ambitious.
The Security Council of the future has to be fit for purpose, efficient, transparent, open and accountable, with strengthened decision-making capacity. The Council’s composition must adequately reflect the current world. It must also be inclusive in conducting its business to better respond to the current global threats.
But there is no easy formula for how to do that. Otherwise, we would already have a balanced, agile and effective Security Council in place. One thing is certain — and this is also acknowledged in the Pact for the Future — the scope and use of the veto right must be limited. Estonia supports all efforts to limit the use of the veto, especially with regard to actions aimed at ending or preventing mass atrocities. Currently the veto right in the Security Council gives its holder a great power, which can also bring finding solutions to a standstill, especially when a solution sharply conflicts with the interests of the veto-holding member.
Deadlocks of the Security Council can be measured directly in lost and crippled human lives, which is not right and wholly unacceptable. We believe that all States collectively should have a bigger say in maintaining peace and security than one member of the Security Council, especially in the case of a deadlock in the Council.
We cannot restore the credibility of the multilateral system and the United Nations when a permanent member of the Security Council acts against the principles of the Charter. Let us therefore wisely use the powers of the General Assembly. We, in the General Assembly, should be able to collectively overcome the veto in the Security Council if the situation requires it. Let us analyse the options for how the General Assembly could gain more prominence. In addition, I recommend taking this analysis to our capitals and to different conferences around the world in order to gather new ideas in an inclusive global debate.
The Pact for the Future acknowledges the need for revitalizing the work of General Assembly, also in terms of strengthening coordination with the Security Council, which, inter alia, would mean that future peace operations could better respond to existing challenges and emerging realities. The precision and sharpness of the Pact for the Future allows us to believe that the United Nations 2.0 is an idea that could meet the current challenges on the ground.
The pain of losing a person close to us is grave. It hurts us no matter where it happens. Life will never be the same after such a tragedy. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine causes inhumane suffering, as do the war in Gaza, the worsening fighting in the Sudan, the tensions, instability, human rights violations in the Sahel, the war in Syria, the unresolved Rohingya crisis, the humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen and the suppression and torture of girls and women in Afghanistan.
Since the horrific terrorist attacks by Hamas against Israel almost a year ago, there has been too much suffering in Gaza and the region. The destruction, loss of life and trauma is unimaginable and only leads to a vicious cycle of violence and deepening hatred. We believe it is high time for an agreement that would establish a ceasefire and allow for the release of hostages.
Without being naive or blind to regional complexity, Estonia is deeply convinced that the two-State solution is the only way to a just and lasting peace. Israelis and Palestinians each deserve to live in a free, sovereign country, within secure and recognized borders. We must step up our efforts to achieve this goal.
In this very Hall, the global community has condemned Russia’s aggression against Ukraine (resolution ES‑11/1). Russia has attacked international peace and security and as well as the United Nations Charter. That is a fact confirmed by the General Assembly. We must also firmly condemn the actions of those that arm Russia in this aggression — Iran and North Korea.
It has been becoming increasingly important not to lose sight of the truth of the situation. We cannot and we will not accept the blurring of realities on the ground. Russia’s war against Ukraine is a clear black-and-white situation. Russia is the aggressor, and Ukraine is the victim.
Russian violations against international law are brutal and widely documented. Russia has systematically killed civilians. Ukrainian children are deported to camps far away from their homes and parents, supposedly to teach them how to think correctly. Unfortunately sending people to so-called correction camps where they are taught “correct” behaviour patterns are without precedent in today’s world. It makes me wonder in which century we actually live.
What would any of us do if the aggressor, the murderer of our parents, stood in front of us? Would we demand justice, accountability and the end of aggressive behaviour? Or would we call the aggressor for a chat to settle misunderstandings between us?
Deplorably the smooth talk about dialogue and the importance of Ukraine and Russia engaging in direct peace talks is only supporting the Russian cause, especially when the so-called peace proposals fail to recognize which party launched the aggression and which party is actually bearing the brunt of the suffering.
We are not going to call Russia to have a coffee. Instead, we call on the Russians to accept President Zelenskyy’s 10-point peace formula, which has wide international support. Russia must end the aggression and withdraw its troops and military equipment from the territory of Ukraine. Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty must be restored. We demand that Russia stop its cynical and shameless exploitation of various conflicts to its own advantage. By fuelling contradictions in Africa, Europe, America or elsewhere, Russia attacks the coherence of our societies and generates instability.
Misinformation is a widely used weapon for that purpose. We have to act decisively to counter the systematic spread of lies. To succeed in this, we must develop critical thinking and knowledge. That is why providing universal education across the world is so strategically important.
While drafting United Nations resolutions we must consider the new mechanisms that are being weaponized to undermine international peace and security. The world has changed. Information is rushing out in various digital formats, and we tend to live in fragmented bubbles, which, in turn, can create fertile ground for extremist terrorist groups or neo-imperial expansionist ambitions. Similarly, refugees are sometimes used as pawns in actions designed to destabilize.
Our changing world poses new challenges. Let us make sure that the methods, agencies and resolutions used by the United Nations meet the requirements of the twenty-first century.
Last year Estonia proposed the Fit for Freedom agenda that calls for a global discussion, first, on how to reinforce multilateralism and the international rules-based system with the United Nations Charter at its core; secondly, on how to foster decision-making that includes all States and societies; and thirdly, on how to ensure human rights and freedoms for all.
The central idea of Fit for Freedom is simple: international law must be upheld, and the rules must be applied. Only then are we all better off. We do not need a global cataclysm to build something instead of the United Nations. We have learned from the past and are able to build on the structures of the United Nations already in place. What it takes most of all to succeed is political will.
The possibilities to engage with the work of the Security Council and its subsidiary organs should be expanded to include all the members of the General Assembly. With the specific help from technology, the Security Council’s accountability must be enhanced. If the working culture were more open, hypocrisy and lies would indeed have shorter legs. Promoting new, open and swift-acting models of work and administration is the second pillar on how we can make the world freer.
This year Estonia chairs the Media Freedom Coalition, and next year it will chair the Freedom Online Coalition. We will build on the conviction that fundamental freedoms and human rights should be the mainstay of international politics, even more forcefully and consciously than they have been before today. If fundamental human rights are protected, then we may conclude that international law and the United Nations Charter will not only be maintained, but they will be strengthened. When international rules apply to everyone, the world is fit for freedom.
Positive change is possible. Estonia’s own story is a perfect illustration of that. We have built a digital, cybersecure society where citizens feel that they themselves are the State, which is as it should be. We know from our own experience that freedom combined with the proper technology and an innovation-oriented mindset are the best tools for finding long-term solutions. It is true that free societies might also need some updates from time to time, and the latest plug-ins should be optimized for user-friendly performance. That is so because, if maintained properly, they do not crash and freeze the way autocracies tend to do.
Estonians have a vivid memory of the times when human rights were denied to us. This makes Estonia vigorous in standing up for those fighting for their rights today. We partner with those who have reached out for a helping hand to enhance children’s access to education and medicine. We unite with those who work tirelessly to grant women and girls equal rights with men and boys. And we are aligned with all who follow the principles of the universality and indivisibility of human rights. My country stands for these principles as a candidate for the Human Rights Council for the term 2026 to 2028.
What kind of change are we going to see? We know the answer. It is up to us to reform the United Nations so that it can safeguard international peace and security and build a world fit for freedom. Let us get to work and do something about that.
