I congratulate you, Sir, and your country, Cameroon, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I wish you a successful term.
I also convey my appreciation to Mr. Dennis Francis, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, for his leadership.
It is an honour and privilege for me to address the Assembly, representing my country, Ethiopia.
As a country that was one of the 51 founding Members of the United Nations, Ethiopia is a strong proponent of effective multilateralism centred on the United Nations. Ethiopia views with grave concern the challenges the United Nations faces in discharging its role in peace and security and socioeconomic development.
Nevertheless, ensuring the readiness and capability of the United Nations to resolve global challenges has been a generational quest. Seventy-four years ago in 1950, five years after the establishment of the United Nations, Ethiopia in its policy statement stated to the Assembly,
“We are filled with anxiety... concerning the surprises which the future may
hold in store; fears that the United Nations may be called upon to face events even more serious than those of the present time, and that such problems may greatly exceed its powers and capacity.” (A/PV.289, para. 2)
That future is now and that future is the present. We are faced with persisting peace and security challenges across the globe. There is a devastating existential threat emanating from the arms race, extreme poverty, inequality and climate change. At the same time, global commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is receding and the debt crisis in developing countries is worsening. Furthermore, our constrained ability to manage the emerging multipolar world carries the risk of undermining multilateralism.
As envisaged, the United Nations is called upon to face challenges that are proving to exceed its powers and capabilities. It is our view that collective security will be realized if States are able to exercise their authority and carry out their responsibilities to safeguard their national security. Conventional dictates, including peacekeeping missions, can deliver the desired results when we prioritize support for national efforts and capabilities. We must therefore at all times preserve the sovereignty and political independence of States as the foundation of effective collective security. We also call for greater economic and security cooperation among Member States, which is pivotal to empowering national institutions.
The shortcomings of the United Nations reflect the reluctance of the international community to promote the effective realization of the principles and purposes of the Charter. The United Nations should be at the centre of efforts to resolve global peace and security challenges. Without a substantial role for the United Nations, guided by the principles of the Charter, we risk making the General Assembly an inconsequential platform with no guarantee that it can make a meaningful contribution to global peace and security. On its part, the United Nations should play its role by demonstrating impartiality, independence, competence and credibility among all its Members.
Furthermore, we underscore the urgent need to reform the Security Council and its working methods. The reform of the Security Council is not only about rectifying the injustice done to Africa, but also about the credibility of the Council itself. The impacts of Africa’s exclusion and the Security Council’s inability to discharge its cardinal responsibilities, manifest in its disproportionate focus on the internal affairs of African countries. In addition, the Council’s lukewarm attitude towards regional solutions and its implementation of measures detached from the reality on the ground are results of Africa’s non-representation. We therefore call on Member States to commit to prioritizing Africa’s representation in both categories of membership of the Security Council, with all the rights and prerogatives as articulated under the African Common Position. There is no shortcut or half solution to that long-standing quest for equality.
The African Union has designed Agenda 2063 as a blueprint for the continent’s development. The Agenda is being implemented in synchronization with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The fact that the SDGs are off-track, mostly due to lack of financing, is a source of concern for Africa. The compounding debt crisis also requires urgent and sustainable solution. Therefore, those Member States with impact on global financial institutions should make the necessary financial resources available.
On its part, Ethiopia has been consistent in its efforts to achieve those development goals. In parallel with resolving a complex security challenge through an African Union-facilitated peace process, Ethiopia has redoubled its efforts to forge peace and development. We are making progress in poverty eradication and realizing people-centred development. We have introduced transformational shifts to our monetary and economic policies and to advance our digital infrastructure. We are confident that our development path will bring great benefits to our people. We call on all actors in development finance to work with us with a sense of solidarity and cooperation to navigate the challenges of reform and attain sustainable economic growth and development.
I have the distinct pleasure to announce to the Assembly the milestone which the Nile River basin has achieved this year. The Nile Basin Cooperative Framework Agreement (CFA) is poised to enter into force with the required number of ratifications. The entry into force of the first-ever Nile River basin-wide treaty — the Cooperative Framework Agreement — will pave the way for sustained cooperation and shared growth across the entire river basin. Ethiopia, along with its co-riparian sisterly countries, will work towards the realization of the principles of the CFA and the full potential of the Nile River. Furthermore, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is generating electricity, responding to the energy demands of Ethiopia and the East Africa region. It is our sincere hope that the remaining riparian countries will join the treaty and play a constructive role in ensuring equitable and reasonable utilization of the Nile River.
I am also proud to announce to the Assembly that the Ethiopian Green Legacy Initiative, the notable initiative of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, has seen to the planting of over 40 billion seedlings within five years, increasing our forest coverage from 3 to 24 per cent. That stands as a substantial global contribution to the absorption of greenhouse gases and a tangible measure against the adverse impacts of climate change. Based on its Long-term Low-Emission Development Strategy, Ethiopia is also on the path to sustainable energy transformation by developing and transitioning to non-fossil fuel energy sources. Such efforts must be supported by the full activation of global commitments, especially through the provision of adequate climate financing.
Maritime insecurity in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean is a source of great concern for Ethiopia. With a population of more than 120 million people and significant maritime trade, Ethiopia depends entirely on the safety and security of maritime activity in the Red Sea and Indian Ocean. The region is threatened by conflicts, piracy and other illicit activities. Over the years, Ethiopia has played an instrumental role in combating the causes of insecurity. We are also pursuing our efforts to work with our neighbours to contribute on a durable basis to ensuring peaceful navigation on the high seas. We see a great need to chart a new path for inclusive maritime security engagement, with the equal participation of countries with stakes on both sides of the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean.
Furthermore, terrorism continues to be a grave threat to the peace and security of the Horn of Africa. Violent extremist groups like Al-Shabaab and its international affiliates are growing and continuing their vicious attacks against civilians and the security of the region. The region has reached a milestone in degrading terrorism, owing to the resilience of the people of Somalia and the sacrifices of the sons and daughters of Burundi, Djibouti, Kenya, Uganda and my country, Ethiopia. The authorization of the Security Council and the international financing for the African Union peace support operation have indeed played an instrumental role.
I am confident that the Government of Somalia will soon recognize the sacrifice we have made for Somalia’s liberation from the grip of terrorist groups. Ethiopia’s memorandum of understanding with Somaliland is based on the existing political dispensation in Somalia. Our objective is shared growth and prosperity in the region. Similar agreements have been concluded by other States and there is no reason for the Government of Somalia to incite hostility that is obviously intended to cover internal political tensions. I therefore reject the unfounded allegations levelled against my country. Ethiopia’s name can never be associated with any one of those allegations. Instead, I call on the federal Government of Somalia to join hands in eliminating the terrorist groups that are causing chaos and mayhem for the people of the region.
The recent manoeuvres of actors from outside the Horn of Africa region undermine those efforts. Nevertheless, Ethiopia will not be deterred from its resolute commitment to combatting terrorism. We therefore call upon those actors to immediately stop their reckless actions. We also call on the international community to recognize the imminent risk originating from those irresponsible acts and to take concrete measures to prevent the loss of hard-won gains in combating terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ethiopia’s commitment to the maintenance of global peace and security and to upholding multilateralism.
