On entering this building, one’s eye is drawn to a bluish light, which is cast by the Peace Window. At the heart of the United Nations, the Window is dedicated to those who serve the Organization. It was designed by Marc Chagall, a Russian Jew, who spent much of his life in exile, living through two world wars. To safeguard the peace and security that were wrested back in 1945, the pledges of freedom and solidarity were enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
This marks the tenth consecutive address that I have had the honour of delivering from this rostrum. In 2015, I listed the challenges confronting our generation — conflict, poverty, climate and migration — and of course none of them have disappeared. At the time, 10 years ago, we thought that in the multilateral order we had a sound and robust framework that would allow us to work on them together. Ten years on, that framework is shattering before our very eyes. The use of force and unilateral acts is proliferating, and we are witnessing, at times with a sense of powerlessness, three major conflicts, which form an explosive cocktail.
In Ukraine, a permanent member of the Security Council has launched an illegal and unprovoked war — a blatant attempt to impose the law of force rather than the force of law. As a result, the war represents not only a direct threat to the Ukrainian people, but also a threat to each and every one of us. The European Union is supporting, and will continue to support, Ukraine for as long as necessary. Standing by the pledge of freedom and solidarity, we reaffirm our commitment to a global, just and lasting peace that must be grounded in the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Freedom and solidarity — it is those very principles that compel us to condemn the despicable terrorist acts perpetrated by Hamas, and we demand the unconditional release of all the hostages. Israel has the right to defend itself in accordance with international law and the principle of proportionality. We want an immediate ceasefire in accordance with the order handed down by the International Court of Justice. Every civilian life counts, and we condemn all indiscriminate attacks on civilian populations. The European Union is taking action and intends to take further action for a lasting peace, in line with a two-State solution. The never-ending escalation must cease. And let me be clear: drawing Lebanon into that spiral is absolutely irresponsible. Thus far, those calls, directed at the Government of Israel among others, have been to no avail, and that cannot continue. We support the existence of a strong, democratic State of Israel, living in peace and security, alongside the Palestinian people, who must have their own viable and stable State.
The Palestinian people deserves respect and dignity. To the Government of Israel, I say that to seek security while neglecting peace is delusional. It does not work, because peace is the best guarantor of security. A world fuelled by vengeance and collective punishment is a less safe world. The Palestinian people its are entitled to its own State and the denial of that right will be a perpetual source of security threats to the Israelis and to Jews worldwide. To deny Palestinians their rights makes the world a more dangerous place and undermines the multilateral system, in which double standards cannot be tolerated.
The civil war in the Sudan is raging, with violence, brutality and rape, and as always, women are bearing the brunt. It is a cataclysmic humanitarian disaster, which has left 20,000 dead and millions displaced and in an emergency situation. The entire Horn of Africa risks being plunged into chaos. My question is: what do the two warring generals amount to without their foreign backing? Arms supplies must end. We can stop this conflict if we want. Now, therefore, is the time to act and set in motion the necessary reconciliation and peace processes.
The life of a child killed in the bombing of a school is precious, in Ukraine, in Gaza and everywhere. The dignity denied to a woman who was raped is sacred, in times of war as it is in times of peace and in the Sudan, in Ukraine and everywhere. To deprive an entire population of food is a war crime, in Ukraine, in Gaza, in the Sudan and elsewhere. A crime is a crime, irrespective of who the perpetrator is and irrespective of where it takes place. For our indignation to be genuine, it must be universal. The European Union upholds international humanitarian law with the same fervour, everywhere and at all times. We condemn acts of destabilization, whoever the perpetrators may be. Iran comes to mind, which, through proxies, supports actions that are ravaging and debilitating the Middle East. Iran’s military backing for Russia’s war against Ukraine also comes to mind. One thing is plain to see: both Iran and Russia are using the same playbook — nuclear threats, nostalgia-tinted imperialist ambitions and the backing of lawless terrorist groups to destabilize their backyard and beyond.
The creation of the United Nations and the rules-based international system represented a momentous stride forward. To turn back the clock is to revert to war. Now more than ever since 1945, the world is being rocked by an explosive cocktail of shocks that are compounding and gaining momentum. A third World War is a possibility, and we must urgently come to our senses. To do so requires cooperation, courage and the observance of shared rules. To that end, the Security Council must free itself from the paralysing yoke of the right of veto in its current form. The Council is not representative, it has scant legitimacy, and it is ineffectual. The Security Council is becoming, increasingly, a ghost council.
In June 1945, when the Charter of the United Nations was adopted, President Truman stated that the Charter would be expanded and improved as time went on. Changing conditions, he said, would require readjustments. Decades have passed, the world has changed, readjustments have been made , and nonetheless the Security Council must be reformed and made more inclusive. Africa and, in my opinion, Latin America, in particular, must, in particular, have a permanent seat. Regional organizations must be more closely integrated into the United Nations decision-making process, and I propose that this include giving them an automatic non-voting voice within the Security Council.
There is no freedom when droughts devastate our crops. There is no freedom when floods ravage our houses, when hurricanes destroy our homes. There is no freedom when our children have no access to vaccines, medicine and school. Global warming and pandemics are opening our eyes to the need for solidarity. This is not simply a moral question that goes to dignity or generosity: it is also in the interests of developed countries to support climate transition and development and to help developing countries to strengthen their healthcare systems. In that vein, with Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, we set in train the idea of an international treaty on pandemics. Negotiations have made good progress, but it is now time to bring them to a conclusion. Mpox is yet another wake-up call. It is unacceptable for lobbies and self-interest to stand in the way of a fair sharing of vaccine technologies and medicines.
There can be no freedom in a world where every person is reduced to their personal data, to a commercial target or to a target to be monitored or even manipulated. The digital revolution and its flagship product — artificial intelligence — necessarily represent a tremendous driver of progress. It is a new catalyst of prosperity, provided that it serves humanity, freedom and human rights. It is essential, in my view, that we do not make the mistake that we made with natural resources, namely by abusing them to the point that we have put our planet under severe strain. Data and artificial intelligence are instruments of power and perhaps even of economic and political servitude; they are becoming weapons of war. We must therefore manage those advances worldwide, and we support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to do so in this forum.
Technological competition is healthy because it promotes progress. It must also take place within a common framework and on a level playing field. And that is why the European Union is involved in this global dialogue, within the Group of Seven, of course, but also with the rest of the world — Africa, Latin America and Asia. We are in dialogue even with those whose ideas and sometimes whose behaviour we oppose. China is a key player in addressing major global challenges, and the European Union is seeking to rebalance its economic relationship with China, by reducing risks and diversifying its supply chains, because overdependence, as we know, opens the door to vulnerability and therefore conflict. We also call on China not to support Russia, either directly or indirectly, in its illegal war against Ukraine, but rather to use its influence to ensure that the Charter of the United Nations is upheld.
The international financial architecture must reduce inequalities, not magnify them. When a Kenyan farmer does not have access to microcredit at affordable rates, this is not merely a detail, it is a global development issue. Since global development is underfunded, the gap between needs for investment and the financial resources that are available is huge. The Bretton Woods system must change radically. Financial firepower must be scaled up to meet people’s real needs, to reduce the climate threat and promote prosperity. Creditor countries need to be bolder to restructure debts and reallocate special drawing rights.
Solidarity is not just about transferring financial or technological resources. It is also about governance — improving the business environment, enhancing legal certainty and mobilizing developing countries’ own resources. As Mo Ibrahim explained candidly: “While economic aid and relief efforts for Africa are wonderful and commendable acts of solidarity, we need to change the way our countries are run”. And to be clear — that also applies to developed countries.
Allow me to conclude my tenth address from this rostrum with a few personal beliefs.
First, double standards are the modern-day poison of international relations. When we defend human dignity, territorial sovereignty, and honest, free and transparent elections, we must defend and protect them everywhere and at all times, and we perhaps should humbly look in the mirror. We are all the heirs of our own histories, cultures, traditions and perhaps also our respective mistakes. We must all learn our lessons with modesty and strive to become better. Europe may go about things in a sometimes-clumsy way, but we are sincere and act in good faith to ensure that freedom and human rights are respected.
Secondly, we need to resolutely reject bipolar confrontation and act forcefully for a multipolar world in a multilateral framework, one in which each country or group of countries chooses its own path to prosper and in which everyone cooperates by following rules that have been agreed with others. Let us also resist the pressure to choose one side against another in a bipolar confrontation that can only end in disaster.
Thirdly, I strongly believe in cooperation between regional organizations and substantial relations with the United Nations. Over the past five years, the European Union has developed its partnerships with the African Union, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Gulf Cooperation Council and the countries of Central Asia. Those cooperation networks are a stabilizing force and drivers of great progress. The European Union wishes to be stronger and more autonomous and to strengthen its ability to interact and work with others for peace, freedom and solidarity. Many people throughout the world expect the European Union to have a strong and independent voice.
Two world wars, the Holocaust, the absolute denial of humanity — the European continent bears those indelible scars, and therefore a special responsibility to defend freedom, solidarity and universal human dignity. The European project is one of reconciliation, cooperation and, increasingly, friendship and fraternity. It is therefore one of inspiration and hope. Optimism is a duty. We can once again change the course of history, if we pull ourselves together. Nothing is inevitable. The future has yet to be written. More peace and security is possible. More freedom and solidarity is possible. Peace requires effort, as we know. Peace is never a given. Peace is delicate and difficult to repair when it breaks. But it is magnificent and bright, and brings hope, like Marc Chagall’s blue peace window. Let us be tireless peacemakers. The European Union can be relied on.
