The United Nations was founded 79 years ago. At the time, we were in many ways standing at a crossroads. The world had been torn apart by two world wars. Something had to be done to contain the belligerence of nation States. We needed common institutions and rules. The mission of the United Nations was actually quite simple — to end war and to promote peace, justice and a better life for the entire world. And for most of its history, it has been able to do exactly that.
I come from Finland. We are a small country in the north-eastern corner of Europe. We are a peace-loving nation. Our recovery from the Second World War and our rise from being one of the poorest countries in Europe to one of the wealthiest and safest — and yes, happiest —countries in the world is closely linked to the success of the United Nations. Our ability to demonstrate dignity, act with respect and promote compromise has played a critical role in our success story. We are a free and open society. We understand the value of this institution as we have first-hand experience of what it can bestow on a country and its citizens at best.
Today, in many ways, we are again standing at a crossroads and I have to admit that I am worried. Divisions between countries and blocs are widening. Our shared understanding of the world has dwindled and been replaced by narratives that fuel controversy, conflict and hatred. The number of ongoing conflicts is the highest since the Cold War and the number of States involved in them is on the rise, especially in three hotspots: Palestine, Ukraine and the Sudan. Human suffering has long since reached a point that should be unacceptable in the Hall. The paradox, of course, is that many countries are rejecting multilateral cooperation at precisely the time when we need it more than ever.
In my speech today, I will focus on three points and I will try to be as concrete and constructive as possible, first, on what unites rather than on what divides us; secondly, on how to end the current wars; and thirdly, on how to reform the United Nations to reflect the world we live in today. By adopting the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), we proved that the United Nations works. I have to say that my address today is to all of us collectively, not to anyone individually. I am not into blame games or whataboutism. We are all responsible. We are all a part of the problem as well as the solution.
First, let us focus on what unites rather than on what divides us. When the Cold War ended, many of us, me included, believed in the thesis of the end of history, namely, that most of the world’s roughly 200 nation States would revert towards peace, prosperity and harmonious coexistence. There was a strong belief that freedom, democracy and globalization would win the day and that technological development, free trade and open information would automatically lead to global development and stability for all.
But they did not. The problem was that we forgot that the dark sides of humankind, including power, actually need to be contained in international institutions like the United Nations. We assumed too much and did too little. The things that were supposed to bring us together — like trade, interdependence and information — are now tearing us apart. We must turn the tide and focus on how we can find common solutions to common global problems.
The biggest challenges in the world — climate change, technology, sustainable development and conflict — are precisely those that we must work on together. We need the United Nations more than ever. We must get back to the trajectory where our common challenges drive cooperation instead of conflicts. We must look for win-win solutions for all, rather than zero-sum games benefiting the few.
To mitigate and adapt to climate change and to halt biodiversity loss, we need to work together. Our future depends on our response to those challenges in very concrete terms. We cannot respond to the very tangible concerns of small island developing States only by planning. We need results. If we do not solve the climate challenge, the crises that follow become unsolvable.
The same goes for technology. Some 30 years ago, we thought that digitalization, artificial intelligence, robotization and biotech would automatically deliver a better world for us and that technology would be a force for good only. We forgot that all disruptive technologies work in both directions, good and bad.
In many ways, we are slipping away from the Sustainable Development Goals. Global poverty is on the increase. When basic needs from nutrition to security are not met, it is impossible to focus on a vision for the future. We have made progress on many accounts, but we need to make sure that the fundamental rights that we have all agreed on together apply to everyone at all levels: regions, nations, peoples and individuals. We need to ensure that the rights of women and girls are respected. The rights of gender and sexual minorities need to be protected globally.
No matter what region we come from, our rhetoric and actions are often inconsistent; we say one thing and then we do another. Right now, we are at a stage where we must do what we say and work together, so let us focus on what unites us rather than on what separates us.
My second point is about conflict. When the United Nations was founded, the underlying idea was “never again” — never again should anyone experience the horror that our predecessors went through in the first half of the twentieth century. The founders of the United Nations promised to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. They, at least partially, succeeded.
But are we, the new generation, succeeding? The simple answer is no. Only this year and last, hundreds of thousands of people have been killed, including more than 10,000 children in Gaza. Child abduction is being used as a weapon of war in Ukraine. Millions of people worldwide have been forced to leave their homes. Malnutrition and disease are on the increase.
Current wars highlight a glaring contradiction. Critical decisions about war and peace are made by a tiny number of people, often driven by a cynical need to hold on to power. The global majority, who have the interest in peace, do not have enough power in the international system to keep them in check. That is true in Ukraine and Palestine, as well as in the Sudan.
In Ukraine, a just peace, based on President Zelenskyy’s 10-point peace plan, is clearly in the interests of the global majority. The war continues because Russian leaders are not willing to end it. While Russia is doing its best to blame others for its own aggression, we must systematically revert to the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. Neither Russia nor any other country has a historical right to anyone else’s region or people. The core of the United Nations Charter is respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. Finland condemns in the strongest possible terms the Russian aggression in Ukraine. Finland equally condemns attempts to manipulate the global information space to destroy the principles that have sustained world peace for decades. I call on President Putin to end the war and end it now.
In Palestine, we must ask ourselves whose interests are driving the war. Peace meets the interests of the global majority and the Palestinians and Israelis. A ceasefire, a two-State solution and regional security arrangements would ensure stability as well as economic and societal development across the region. International law holds the key to a solution that would keep Palestinians and Israelis alike safe. After the most recent tragedies, there is no other direction but forward and we must find a solution. There are no more excuses. That war needs to end and it needs to end now.
In the Sudan, regardless of which of the groups that are fighting will finally win the war, the victims of that war will be the civilians and the transition to civilian rule built by them —the civilian rule behind which the entire international community has promised to stand and the civilians for whom we promised to seek a better future. In the Sudan, we have failed to apply the principle of African solutions to African problems. Instead, the Sudan is becoming an arena for regional and international rivalry. Our shared goal to build a Sudan that would be an equal partner for all of us in security, trade and in the multilateral forums is moving further and further away. No one benefits from that development in the long term.
I therefore call upon the United Nations to take centre stage in conflict resolution and prevention once again. Peace mediation cannot be transactional; it has to be centred on the United Nations. International law, the United Nations Charter and the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States must prevail.
My third and final point is that we need the United Nations more than ever, and without far-reaching reform I am afraid it will be sidelined. It all begins with agency, with a feeling that we all have a say. Whether it is about climate change, technology, sustainable development or conflict, the same challenge remains — the current international institutions do not reflect global realities. The majority of the world is not properly represented in the global institutions and its interests are not met. That must change.
Ending wars would benefit most if not all of us, but currently we do not have the mechanisms to drive the interest of the global majority. Many countries do not feel that they have a say in global institutions. As a result, the institutions are losing their legitimacy. Shortcomings in multilateral institutions encourage many to seek solutions outside traditional international institutions. Alliances, whether based on interests or values or both, are creating a transactional world of disorder where size and power benefit a minority rather than the majority.
The cold truth is that we cannot postpone reform any longer, and in many ways history is on our shoulders, just as it was with those who founded the United Nations in 1945. If our goal is to focus on what unites us rather than on what divides us, we need a far-reaching reform of the Security Council. Let me try out Finland’s ideas for reform and see what Members think of it. Finland’s three point-proposal today is very concrete and some might say overly optimistic, but I do feel that we have to begin somewhere. So here we go.
First, all major continents need to be represented in the Security Council at all times. It is unacceptable that there is no permanent representation from Latin America and Africa and that China alone represents Asia in the Security Council. We therefore propose that the number of permanent members be increased by five — more concretely, two from Asia, two from Africa and one from Latin America. The total number of permanent members would thus be 10. That, combined with 10 elected members, would ensure that the Security Council would hold roughly 10 per cent of the United Nations Members at any given time. My part of the world, Europe, should think hard about how best to divide its existing two seats.
Secondly, no single State should have veto power. I fully understand that the veto was necessary in the aftermath of the Second World War, but in today’s world it has too often incapacitated the Security Council and halted decision-making here in New York. The United Nations agencies are not subject to national vetoes and are working effectively precisely because no single Member can prevent them from doing so.
Thirdly and finally, if a permanent or elected member of the Security Council violates the United Nations Charter, its voting rights should be suspended. That decision should ultimately be taken in the General Assembly. There should be no room for double standards in the United Nations.
Despite all of our challenges, I want to end on an optimistic note. My optimism arises from an innate belief that when humans are faced with a binary choice, we often end up doing the right thing. Our choice today is simple. We can continue towards a multipolar world of disorder or we can start getting serious about solving our common problems through multilateral institutions and a reformed United Nations.
As my mentor and great friend of the United Nations, the late President Martti Ahtisaari, said in his acceptance speech for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2008: “Peace is a question of will. All conflicts can be settled, and there are no excuses for allowing them to become eternal”. Let us keep Martti’s words in mind and start working towards peace.
