I bring greetings from the people of Fiji.
I would also like to offer sincere congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang on his election to his high office. We wish him well in the discharge of his important duties.
As this is my first appearance before the General Assembly, I begin by reiterating the words of the first Prime Minister of Fiji, the late Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, in his inaugural address to the Assembly in 1970:
“We do not live by bread alone, and it is only from the firm base of sound moral and spiritual standards that we can go on to meaningful economic progress… [Q]uality should not take second place to quantity especially when we are estimating a society, its life and accepted values. Quality is measured by standards, and these standards must be observed by larger nations as well as by smaller… But it is for the United Nations to set the standards and to disseminate them widely…” (A/PV.1876, paras. 210-211).
That statement was made when the United Nations was celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary under the theme “Peace, justice and progress”. Fifty-four years later, the theme of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session — “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere” — echoes similar sentiments. It resonates with us in its importance, its relevance from when Fiji first joined the United Nations and its urgency in today’s precarious global context.
Climate change, sea level rise, pandemics, poverty, unsustainable development, conflicts, inequalities and injustices everywhere — the challenges are daunting. From Gaza to the Sudan, Ukraine, Afghanistan and beyond — conflicts rage on as humanitarian needs escalate. Those are the challenges we have been fighting since time immemorial. They are the background against which the United Nations was established in 1945.
Today the rapid evolution of technology has made us more connected than ever before in history. However, the more connected we are, the wider grow the gaps between the rich and the poor, the developed and the developing world. Small island developing States, which are on the front lines of climate change and sea level rise, continue to grapple with the impacts of climate-induced disasters, with devastating consequences for the ecosystem and for vulnerable communities.
This year, at least 72 countries, whose combined population comprises almost half of the world’s total population, have already elected or will soon select their own leaders at the polls. The world is in need of courageous leaders who are willing to garner the political will and mobilize the resources to bridge the divide and seek solutions that benefit humankind. We have two choices before us: to give up and go home or to stay the course, renew and redouble our efforts and rethink and reform together. The choice we make will be our legacy. We choose the latter, not for ourselves but for those coming after us. Strong international cooperation, diplomacy and a commitment to upholding the principles of the United Nations are not only important but indispensable. It is time to go back to the basics — the foundation and purpose of the Charter of the United Nations. We must invest in the empowerment of humankind and the protection of human rights.
Next year the United Nations will turn 80. The United Nations is only as strong as its Member States. For 79 years, the global community has placed its trust in multilateralism and in the United Nations to foster cooperation, uphold human rights and promote global stability. We now live in an age of distrust, fuelled by the increasing disconnect between people’s expectations and the inadequate responses of the multilateral system. It is our collective responsibility to counter misinformation and disinformation. Trust is a prerequisite for effective multilateralism. The continued success of multilateralism is critical. There is more to be done to ensure that the voices of all countries are heard. An inclusive and responsive multilateral system must be able to respond and adapt to the challenges of today. The stakes are high for developing countries, including small island developing States and least developed countries, which continue to be left behind in the development race as we grapple with multiple crises.
Despite our limited resources, the unfairness of the global governance system and obvious inequalities, small island developing States continue to forge ahead. We do not have the luxury of time, nor can we justify inaction. Building economic resilience is a requirement for sustainable development in small island developing States. Recovery from the frequency and magnitude of climate-related shocks, including disasters, is a costly affair. Mobilizing the up-front funding needed for adaptation remains a challenge as resources are focused on recovery and reconstruction. The adoption of the multidimensional vulnerability index for small island developing States opens a new chapter in the ongoing effort to safeguard the future of vulnerable developing countries. Mainstreaming the multidimensional vulnerability index into existing practices and policies will help ease the economic burden for small island developing States when it is needed the most.
Cultivating a culture of peace is now more urgent than ever. The blue Pacific continent knows the value of peace, having lived through the horrors of its absence. Our oceans and its diverse and vibrant lands were the theatre of the two World Wars and a testing ground for the most dangerous weapons, the impacts of which are still felt today. Yesterday, 25 September, there was a unilateral test firing of a ballistic missile into the Pacific ocean. We urge respect for our region and call for the cessation of such action. Under principle 4 of the Ocean of Peace, as endorsed by the Pacific leaders in Tonga last month, our statements reinforce the Pacific’s peaceful example to uphold international law and urge others to refrain from actions that undermine peace and security in the blue Pacific.
Under principle 12, the Ocean of Peace sets and champions rules of responsible, peaceful and deconflicting behaviour. Fiji may be a small State, but through our leadership and stewardship roles in the region, we make a profound contribution to regionalism and multilateralism. Fiji’s first-ever foreign policy white paper builds on the three interconnecting themes of Fiji’s foreign policy: sovereignty, security and prosperity.
Fiji’s National Development Plan 2025-2029 envisions empowering the people of Fiji through unity, based on the pillars of economic resilience, people empowerment and good governance. True to the spirit of multilateralism, our bilateral, regional and multilateral development partners are a key part of our efforts. We commit to the principles of the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent and to the Pacific leaders’ vision of a prosperous blue Pacific continent.
As a large ocean State, Fiji is a proud advocate for the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Fiji has signed and will ratify the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction in the lead-up to the third United Nations Ocean Conference in France. Fiji has ratified the World Trade Organization Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies, which is aimed at eliminating harmful subsidies that contribute to illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing. We call for concerted efforts at the World Trade Organization to finalize part two of the Fisheries Subsidies Agreement, which addresses subsidies to overfishing and overcapacity. Fiji reiterates the importance of understanding the vast ocean space, guided by science and data, in order to undertake risk-informed decisions.
As the global community prepares for the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP29), in Baku, we call on countries to work together with the United Nations to implement the outcomes of the global stocktaking undertaken at COP28. Deep, rapid and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, in line with the 1.5° C target, must be vigorously pursued and accelerated. The phase-out of unabated coal power and the transition away from fossil fuels in energy systems will contribute to the achievement of net zero targets by 2050.
Both adaptation and mitigation financing require a substantial increase. We call on States to commit to finalizing the new collective quantified goal and address glaring gaps in climate finance.
The momentum from COP27 and COP28 on the Loss and Damage Fund and the Santiago Network must be accelerated in order to protect vulnerable communities that stand to lose the most from the climate crisis, particularly in small island developing States and least developed countries.
By 2050, around 240 of our coastal communities will be displaced by sea level rise. Forty-two communities are in urgent need of relocation. With the limitations of the multilateral climate financing architecture, Fiji has established the world’s first national relocation trust fund to support our relocation costs. We have issued domestic and international green and blue bonds, piloted low-cost parametric insurance products for rural communities and engaged the private sector in climate resilience-building. We call on our development partners to support our efforts.
The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), adopted at the Summit of the Future earlier this week (see A/78/PV.3), opens pathways to new possibilities. The world deserves a future of peace, dignity and prosperity. It is never too late. Fiji’s commitment to multilateralism is unwavering. We will continue to work closely with the United Nations and all Member States to advance efforts towards building a better, safer and fairer world for all.
