I speak here on behalf of a country that will never forget what nations are capable of when they unite: freedom — France has just paid tribute this year to the peoples of America, Europe, Africa, Asia and Oceania who enabled it to free itself from the Nazis’ grip eight decades ago — progress and peace. Once liberated, France and its peoples founded a community of free and sovereign States, capable of committing themselves to each other and agreeing on the essentials. Also, hope, and we saw that again recently during the Olympic and Paralympic Games hosted by France this summer in the beauty, enthusiasm and harmony of peoples.
And yet despite that jubilation, the Olympic truce — called for unanimously in this very Hall — has never come to fruition. And yet the danger of empty words and impotent diplomacy lies before us every day. And yet our Organization is facing the greatest convergence of crises in its eight decades of existence, and there is a growing sense of a loss of control in the face of war, climate change and growing inequality and injustice. Every day, humankind seems to fragment further, at a time when the circumstances demand strong and effective collective responses.
To restore to those two words — United Nations — their power to inspire hope, we must come together, as we once did, atop a crucial foundation. And that is what I would like to say a few words about.
First and foremost, we must restore the terms of trust and respect among peoples, which I can see fading away in the debates we are holding. To do so, we must show equal concern for those who suffer. I spoke of this here two years ago (see A/77/ PV.4), when I warned of the possibility of a double standard. A life is a life. The protection of civilians is an imperative standard and must remain our North Star, even as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions this year. Let us not for a single moment entertain the idea that the deaths in Ukraine are those of the North, that the deaths in Gaza are those of the South or that the deaths in the conflicts in the Sudan, the Great Lakes region and Burma are those of consciences that are all too alone in their indignation.
Regaining control and restoring trust therefore entails a universal quest for peace, refusing to accept any differences whenever the dignity of human life or the territorial integrity or sovereignty of States is at stake. The conflicts we face today call into question our very ability to ensure respect for our Charter of the United Nations. And when I see certain parties wanting to propose peace by demanding capitulation, I am astonished that anyone could support such an idea.
I wish to reiterate here how vital the protection of civilians, all humanitarian workers and all those who work to uphold our shared values is in every one of those conflicts.
We must find a collective response to the major challenges posed by the two wars affecting Europe and the Middle East.
In Ukraine, Russia is waging a war of territorial conquest in defiance of the most fundamental principles of international life. It is guilty of serious breaches of law, ethics and even honour. None of Russia’s actions correspond to the common interest of nations, nor to the particular responsibilities it assumes in this Organization. Ukraine’s fate affects peace and security in Europe and throughout the world. For who would still believe that we are protected from our strongest, most violent and greediest neighbours if we let Russia prevail as though nothing had happened? No one.
It is therefore in our common interest — in the common interest of all nations — that Ukraine’s legitimate rights be restored as swiftly as possible and to build a just and lasting peace. France will continue to do everything in its power to ensure that Ukraine stands firm, removes itself from danger and obtains justice. France will continue to supply Ukraine with the equipment it needs to defend itself and, together with its closest allies and partners, will support the remarkable resistance of the Ukrainian people and work to ensure their lasting security. Let us seek peace. France will join forces with all sincere partners to build a solid peace for Ukraine and for Europe.
I know that for many Member States, the most important issues are elsewhere: in the all-too-long list of forgotten wars, unjust victories and poorly negotiated or sometimes never implemented resolutions. I have not forgotten any of them, even if I cannot mention them all here. President Tshisekedi Tshilombo preceded me at this rostrum a few moments ago. I will be visiting the Great Lakes region with him and with President Kagame in a few days’ time, as the situation there is of great concern to us. France also stands firmly by Armenia’s side, together with Prime Minister Pashinyan, in the face of pressure from Azerbaijan and territorial tensions. The international community must be there to ensure that peace negotiations succeed and that internationally recognized borders are preserved.
But I know that for many Member States — and for us, too — the essential issue beyond those wars, is the situation today in Gaza, where the fate of the Palestinian people weighs heavily on each of our debates. With regard to such a complex subject, I wish to reiterate France’s position from day one with the utmost clarity. We firmly condemn the terrible and unprecedented terrorist attack carried out by Hamas against Israel on 7 October 2023. Terrorism is unacceptable, regardless of its causes, and we mourn the victims of the Hamas attack on 7 October, including 48 French citizens. My thoughts of compassion and friendship go out to all the families living with the pain of having lost children, relatives or friends on 7 October. We also solemnly call once again for the hostages to be released. Several of our French compatriots remain among them. I also wish to commend the efforts of the United States of America, Egypt and Qatar to achieve the hostages’ release, which remains a priority for us all.
In the face of that terrorist attack, Israel has a legitimate right to protect its own people and to deny Hamas the means to attack again. None of us would have suffered the blows of 7 October without drawing consequences. Nonetheless, Israel’s war on Gaza has gone on far too long. There is no justification nor explanation for the tens of thousands of Palestinian civilian victims. Too many innocent people have died, and we, too, mourn their loss. Their deaths represent a scandal for humankind and a dangerous source of hatred and resentment that does and will threaten the security of all, including of Israel tomorrow.
The war must therefore be brought to an end and a ceasefire implemented as soon as possible. At the same time, the hostages must be freed, and massive-scale humanitarian aid must be delivered to Gaza. We have held that position since October 2023, pushing for resolutions with many Member States and holding the first humanitarian conference for Gaza in Paris in November 2023. Today it is a question of political will, given the destruction of Hamas’s military capabilities. It is imperative that a new phase begin in Gaza, that the weapons fall silent, that humanitarians return and that civilian populations finally be protected.
France will take part in any initiative that saves lives and ensures security for all. The deployment of an international mission must pave the way for the implementation of the two-State solution. It is up to the Security Council to decide on that, and the necessary steps must be taken without further delay to preserve the link between Gaza and the West Bank, to restore the Palestinian Authority to its functions, to ensure the reconstruction of the territory and, quite simply, to make life possible once again.
France will do everything in its power to ensure that the Palestinians finally have a State, living side by side with Israel. The conditions for a just and lasting peace are well known — all that remains is to pave the way, which must be as direct as possible. France will therefore draw the consequences of its commitment to the two-State solution and renew its action to ensure that such a solution finally comes to fruition for the benefit of the peoples, to meet their legitimate aspirations, to bring about a Palestinian State, to provide Israel with all the necessary guarantees for its security and to build mutual recognition and common security guarantees for all in the region. We will be working on that over the coming weeks with Israelis and Palestinians and with all our regional and international partners.
For the time being, as we speak, the main risk is that of escalation. My thoughts are with brotherly Lebanon and the Lebanese people. For too long, Hizbullah has been running the unbearable risk of dragging Lebanon into war. Israel, for its part, cannot extend its operations into Lebanon without consequences. France demands that everyone respect their obligations along the Blue Line. We will therefore act to bring about a diplomatic solution, which is essential to spare the civilian population and prevent a regional explosion. There must not and cannot be a war in Lebanon.
Therefore, we firmly call on Israel to stop escalating in Lebanon and on Hezbollah to stop firing into Israel. We firmly call on all those who provide them with the means to do so to desist. We have asked for the Security Council to meet today for that purpose, which I welcome. The French Foreign Minister will be visiting Lebanon this weekend.
Such is the unity we must demonstrate in the face of the major regional and global challenges we face. Beyond the conflicts we are experiencing that I have just mentioned, we must continue to work together to ensure respect for each other’s sovereignty and build regional and international solutions to those challenges.
That is the essence of the relationship we want with Africa — a new partnership on which we have been working for the past two years. France has done a great deal for the African continent in recent years and decades — particularly in the Sahel, where French armies have successfully fought terrorism side by side with their regional and international partners. Nevertheless, military coups in the region have led us to draw legitimate conclusions.
But Europe and Africa share a common destiny, which calls for a broad partnership for peace and security, which means renewing its terms with more training, more equipment and greater mutual respect. Such a partnership is also based on the economy, energy, sport, culture and remembrance. That is what we have patiently built with Benin, Senegal, Cameroon, Algeria, Morocco and many other countries in recent years, and we will continue to implement it.
That same philosophy has, for six years now, led us to build an unprecedented partnership with the Indo-Pacific, where France’s ambition is to contribute to respect for international law, without which there can be no prosperity. Some in that region, which has experienced exceptional growth in recent decades, are tempted to break the rules or even impose their will by force. France is proposing an alternative — not to take the place of anyone else, but to give the States of the region back the possibility of choosing their partners, project by project. France’s Indo-Pacific territories have unique expertise in combating climate change, protecting biodiversity, developing clean energies and countering transnational threats. Our vocation in that respect in the region is to better cooperate with everyone, in their environment. As is evident, that logic of partnership is aimed at building new balances, rejecting the fragmentation of the world and old patterns and instead seeking, in a spirit of mutual respect, to build paths to stability and peace.
Beyond that, the challenge we face — of course, impacted as we are by the conflicts I just mentioned — is keeping track of our multilateral agenda and holding steadfastly to the effectiveness to which we are committed. After having lived through the coronavirus disease pandemic, which so forcefully reminded us of the importance of some of those common challenges, we must not forget the need to pursue that track. I firmly believe that effective multilateralism has never been as necessary as it is today, and it must lead to results in terms of development and the fight against inequalities in education, health, climate, biodiversity and technology. With regard to each of those pillars, we need unity. Here, too, we need to do everything we can to avoid the divide between North and South. That is exactly the philosophy we developed in the Paris Pact for People and the Planet, which more than 60 countries have now joined.
First of all, we must ensure that we never force any State to choose between its objectives. Why should States in the North lecture States in the South about respecting the climate and therefore forgoing economic opportunities — that they should do what some States in the North failed to do 40, 30 or even 20 years ago? It is unacceptable and unintelligible. Therefore, we need to build an agenda that simultaneously advances the fight against inequality and economic development in favour of education, the climate and biodiversity and global health.
Solutions must be developed and based on proposals from the countries themselves. That is what we have begun to build, for example, with our partnerships for just energy transitions. We cannot implement a single solution for everyone, nor hand down lessons from our capitals whereby, in one way or another, we come to inspect countries and ask them all to follow the same recipe. Each country has its own unique path — that is the key to sovereignty.
Then all we need is a public financial shock and additional private leverage. That is what enabled us, three years ago, to support and work towards increasing the International Monetary Fund’s special drawing rights and to obtain the effective reallocation of almost 100 billion special drawing rights to those countries that need them most, particularly in Africa. It is a silent but indispensable revolution. That is also why, thanks to the strength of the Paris Pact — several members of which we were just with — under the effective authority of President Macky Sall and with the support of the United Nations, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and other organizations concerned, we want to pursue that cycle of reforms and carry out a profound transformation of the multilateral banks and our financial institutions.
We have launched the objective of Finance in Common, bringing together development banks from all over the world, including those whose agendas are not aligned. We need to work on that common financial agenda if we are to meet the objectives I mentioned. In the coming months, we need to work — together, I hope — to thoroughly reform the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. First and foremost, we must renew their membership, as those institutions were conceived at a time when many of the States here were not independent.
The capital structure must be renewed in order to strengthen it. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund were conceived, designed and calibrated at a time when the challenges were not the same, when the global economy was not the same size and when demographics had nothing to do with it. We need to remove absurd taboos — obstructions sometimes imposed by the biggest players who prevent others from putting money in for fear of being diluted. We need to give those institutions the capacity to act and to finance the projects that the countries of the South need.
Such a reform is imperative for our collective credibility. I wish to tell the richest countries and those who, alongside France, have a seat at the table that, should they decide not to do it, they will see an alternative order emerge in the years to come. It will come from others who do not share their agenda. Should they decide not to do it, they will be condemned and accused of cynicism — and perhaps not wrongly so.
That reform of financial multilateralism is essential if we are to meet those challenges. We also need to pursue our climate and biodiversity agenda. The forthcoming Conferences of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change are important meetings, and France will fully play its part, in particular by organizing a major meeting on the oceans for the United Nations, in conjunction with Costa Rica. Indeed, in June 2025, Nice will host the United Nations Ocean Conference, and we will be continuing our work on the process. I hope that many Member States will be able to ratify the achievements of the past few months in that respect, in particular the much-needed Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction. We are also continuing to make progress on the vital issue of water, with the new One Water Summit to be held in partnership with Kazakhstan and Saudi Arabia. I will not go into all the necessary subjects here.
But I would also like to remind representatives that artificial intelligence requires all Member States present here today to coordinate their efforts. We need to encourage innovation. We need to ensure that innovation in artificial intelligence is accessible to all the countries and peoples of the planet and that it does not fuel new divides and inequalities. But we need all of that to develop within a united ethical and democratic framework, designed by the peoples of the planet. We cannot let a few people — let alone private players, who are currently at the forefront of such innovations — think up their future for us and our peoples. That is why France will be hosting the next Artificial Intelligence Action Summit in February 2025. As is evident, the aim is to build a common framework, and I am delighted with the work that has been carried out and coordinated by the Secretary-General, including on the Global Digital Compact, which was drawn up with the best experts and fully embodies the philosophy to which we are committed.
To conclude my remarks, and aware that I have neglected to mention so many difficult situations — from Venezuela to the heart of Africa, as well as so many oceans-related tensions — I would like to conclude by talking about our institutions. I hear a lot of people saying that the United Nations should be scrapped, that it is no longer useful and that it clearly cannot resolve conflicts.
Let us be constructively impatient. Let us be impatient; I share that impatience with you. We cannot be satisfied with not knowing how to settle things. But let us be clear: those responsible are here. As long as we have a Security Council that is blocked, so to speak, in a reciprocal manner dependent on the interests of each side, it will be difficult to move forward. Is there a better system? I do not believe so. Therefore, let us simply make the United Nations more effective, first and foremost by making it more representative.
That is why I reaffirm France’s position in favour of enlarging the Security Council. Germany, Japan, India and Brazil should become permanent members, as should two countries designated by Africa to represent the continent. New elected members should also be admitted. But reforming the composition of the Security Council alone would not be enough to restore its effectiveness. I therefore hope that such a reform will also enable us to change our working methods, to limit the right of veto in cases of mass atrocities and to focus on the operational decisions required
to maintain international peace and security. That is what we must have the courage
and the audacity to do, and it is what we, along with the other current permanent
members, must carry forward.
Nearly 25 years after the Millennium Summit, the time has come to regain our
effectiveness so that we can take more effective action in the field with States and
civil society alike. Beyond the United Nations, we need to usher in a new era in each
of our multilateral institutions, as I have just mentioned.
Those are the few words I wanted to address to the Assembly today. At a grave
moment in our international order, when so many conflicts seem unresolvable, I want
to say that France will continue to try to advance along that demanding path, faithful
to its values, refusing the simplifications of the moment. We will continue to fight
for the simple principles that have always carried us forward, namely, human dignity
and respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which, beyond
conflicts and current events, has a vocation to continue to build with Member States
a fairer and more effective international order. Such will be our voice, always spoken
as one, side by side with our friends and allies, but also free at times to say no and to
refuse the cynicism of the moment or foregone conclusions that are no longer such.
