On behalf of the people and the Government of Micronesia, I extend a warm Kamorale. Back home, Kamorale was coined as a national greeting that combines the diverse languages of all our islands. Kamorale represents the spirit of unity and solidarity that lies at the heart of my country and my people.
That same spirit is equally important in the context of multilateralism here at the United Nations. In a world where global challenges require collective action, Kamorale reminds us that our strength and our solutions come from our ability to come together. Just as the four states of Micronesia come together under one banner, our international community must come together in order to advance the peace, prosperity and sustainable development that we all wish to see, as envisioned in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1).
After travelling thousands of miles from Micronesia with my delegation, I am honoured to be participating in this seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly.
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election as President of the General Assembly, and I assure you of my delegation’s support for your leadership. I also acknowledge our outgoing President of the seventy-eighth session for the impactful work that he carried out during his term. I must also pay tribute to our Secretary-General, who recently joined us in the Pacific region for the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders Meeting. We deeply appreciate his tireless efforts to strengthen our United Nations as a vital instrument for achieving our shared goals.
Since the time when Micronesia became a Member of the United Nations, in September 1991, we have been grappling with the severe impacts of climate change. I cannot emphasize enough that it is the single greatest threat to our home. Even as I speak today, we are currently in a state of emergency owing to the extended drought facing my nation. For us, every degree, every inch of sea level rise and every delay matter. We continue to call on our global community to step up with stronger and urgent action.
I raise an important topic that relates to our island’s ability to adapt to, and survive, the increasing impacts of climate change. Time is running out to prevent the average global temperature from surpassing 1.5°C. We are already at 1.2°C, according to the latest indications. 1.5°C is the safe limit for our small islands. Beyond that lies a danger zone, with deadly heat that will cost lives, impact our food and water systems and submerge many of our low-lying islands.
Carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere for hundreds of years. While it is critical for the world to cut those emissions, the benefits of those cuts will not be felt until later this century. We need to control temperatures now. We call upon the highest emitting countries to prioritize reducing non-carbon dioxide pollutants, especially methane, fluorinated gases and black carbon. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s reports and more recent scientific reports explain that this is the only way. Accordingly, I urge all of us to take greater action now. I call on all parties to the Paris Agreement to include ambitious non-carbon dioxide goals and measures in their 2025 round of nationally determined contributions.
As we take action on non-carbon dioxide pollutants, we also need all countries to come together and agree on a global plan to transition away from fossil fuels in a fair, just and equitable manner. In that connection, I am announcing that Micronesia endorses the fossil fuel non-proliferation treaty initiative. We must accelerate all our efforts to tackle the climate crisis.
The health of our oceans is deteriorating owing to the effects of climate change and greenhouse gas emissions. One of the most hard-hitting issues to confront us is sea level rise. I am very pleased that, for the first time, the General Assembly is hosting a high-level meeting on sea level rise this week. Sea level rise poses a significant threat to the livelihoods, well-being and security of our small island nation communities and ecosystems.
That said, the climate crisis does not jeopardize our statehood or our sovereignty and nor does it diminish our rights under international law. Leaders from the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) and the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) have affirmed that our maritime zones, as recognized by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, will remain valid despite physical changes due to climate change. We emphasize that the statehood and sovereignty of PIF and AOSIS members will endure along with the associated rights and responsibilities, including those concerning the protection of our citizens, regardless of the impacts of sea level rise.
The International Seabed Authority is currently negotiating its draft regulations on exploitation, and Micronesia is adopting a careful approach to seabed mining. We will consider all relevant factors regarding that matter and will join the talanoa being organized this year by the Pacific Islands Forum. Micronesia joins other nations in emphasizing the necessity of comprehensive knowledge, data and scientific understanding of the marine environment and the impacts of deep-sea mining before any exploitation can take place. We urge the International Seabed Authority to finalize all relevant regulations, standards and guidelines for its code on mining prior to exploitation. In addition, it is crucial that all stakeholders, including adjacent coastal States, indigenous peoples and local communities in the Pacific, be consulted and that their perspectives be considered before any exploitation occurs.
Micronesia is pleased with the adoption of the United Nations Agreement on Marine Biodiversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ). I was the first leader to sign the BBNJ Agreement here, in New York, a year ago and among the first to deposit our instrument of ratification. Currently, over 90 countries have signed, and we wish that all will sign. I urge others to sign and ratify so that we can operationalize the BBNJ Agreement. We look forward to the Preparatory Commission’s beginning its important work soon.
The international community is set to adopt a legally binding treaty to end plastic pollution, including in the marine environment, later this year in Busan, Republic of Korea. The treaty must address plastic pollution at its source, that is to say, the production of plastics, in particular the production of primary plastic polymers derived from fossil fuels. Micronesia’s Bridge to Busan Declaration, launched earlier this year, calls for international support to regulate plastics production in the treaty. As negotiations near completion, we urge global backing for the Declaration to ensure the treaty includes strong measures to curb plastic production and tackle both pollution and climate change. If we do not address the unsustainable production of primary plastic polymers, then the global goal of ending plastic pollution by 2040 and limiting the average temperature rise to less than 1.5°C cannot be achieved.
Micronesia plays a vital role in the Pacific Islands Forum 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. As part of the large oceanic countries and territories, we are custodians of nearly 20 per cent of the Earth’s surface, placing immense cultural and spiritual value on our ocean and land as a shared heritage. Our Leaders’ Commitments to 2050 focus on preserving and protecting our oceans, ensuring a sustainable future for our children. Micronesia is dedicated to reducing and preventing the causes and impact of climate change and sea level rise. With the support of our partners, we are committed to achieving net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. We pledge to safeguard the future of our people by protecting our sovereignty, maritime zones and resources, especially in the face of climate-induced sea level rise.
The health of our people is crucial to Micronesia’s nation-building. Non-communicable diseases significantly undermine our nation’s well-being. Non-communicable diseases hinder workforce productivity and contribute to poverty. Unfortunately, the Pacific has some of the highest rates of those diseases, with Micronesia ranking among the top countries. In 2016, non-communicable diseases accounted for 75 per cent of all deaths in Micronesia.
Recognizing that national health emergency, Micronesia has taken decisive action. Since 1995, we have participated in the World Health Organization’s Healthy Islands initiative, focusing on health protection, risk reduction and promoting healthy lifestyles. We developed a national non-communicable diseases action plan in 2006, and the Pacific Non-communicable Diseases Road Map has guided our efforts since 2014. In 2022, we reaffirmed our commitment to securing the well-being of our people through the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. Our fight against non-communicable diseases is key to building a healthier, stronger future for Micronesia.
However, despite decades of effort under the Healthy Islands initiative, non-communicable diseases continue to pose a serious challenge in Micronesia. The persistence of those diseases warrants the need for renewed support and stronger partnerships. There is an opportunity here to re-evaluate both the Healthy Islands initiative and the Pacific Non-communicable Diseases Road Map, exploring ways to enhance their effectiveness. By working together, we can confront the crisis more robustly and ensure that we move forward towards a healthier and more resilient future.
As we gather today, we are reminded of the importance of global peace and security, particularly in the light of the ongoing conflicts in Ukraine and between Israel and Palestine. Micronesia reaffirms its unwavering commitment to peace and dialogue. We condemn the invasion of Ukraine and the killing of innocent civilians. We also condemn the attack by Hamas on Israeli citizens on 7 October 2023, and we believe that every nation has the right to defend its people and territory.
We call for the immediate and safe release of hostages and the cessation of hostilities and urge all parties to work towards a peaceful resolution. It is our profound hope that both Israel and Palestine can resume meaningful negotiations, with the goal of establishing two States living side by side in peace and security, with clear and recognized borders. We commend the constructive efforts of the United States, Egypt and Qatar in supporting the peace process, and we remain hopeful that through diplomacy and cooperation lasting peace can be achieved. Micronesia remains convinced that the protection of innocent civilians everywhere is of paramount importance, as peace can be sustained only when the lives and dignity of all people are protected.
Micronesia joins Pacific Island nations in advocating for the establishment of a special representative for climate, peace and security, emphasizing that climate change is a significant global security threat. The United Nations system, particularly the Security Council, must adapt to address the challenges posed by the climate crisis in a comprehensive and coordinated manner. Currently, the Council struggles to effectively tackle major peace and security issues, highlighting the need for comprehensive reform. That reform should make the Council more effective, inclusive, transparent and accountable. It must reflect the realities of today rather than those of 1945. It is time for permanent membership of the Security Council to be expanded to include Japan, India, Germany, Brazil and representation from the African continent. In addition, it is crucial to amplify the voices of underrepresented regions, such as small island developing States (SIDS), in a reformed Council.
In today’s complex global landscape, strengthening the multilateral system for an inclusive, interdisciplinary United Nations is essential. Support for multi-country offices that represent the United Nations on the ground must be reinforced to assist vulnerable nations in fully implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In addition, the coordination role of resident coordinators should be supported and strengthened.
The reliance of small island developing States on stable international assistance for development cannot be overstated. We need sustainable financing from donor partners and international financial institutions. It is no surprise that SIDS have led the charge for a more inclusive global financial architecture. The recently adopted multi-vulnerability index (MVI) is a crucial tool, providing a comprehensive understanding of the unique challenges faced by SIDS. The next step is to implement the MVI in a way that addresses our specific needs.
The special case of SIDS, in the context of climate change and sustainable development, and their particular vulnerability to natural disasters and external shocks must be supported by an increase in climate finance and investment, including new and additional climate finance. We call on developed countries to fulfil their commitments in that regard.
Gender equality is vital for nation-building and effective governance. By acceding to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Micronesia has committed to achieving gender parity. We have also endorsed the Pacific Leaders Gender Equality Declaration and established a national gender policy. Strengthening gender equality is a priority within my Administration, and I have nominated more women to key roles, including my Cabinet, to address the imbalance in Government. In a historic achievement, three women were recently elected to our 14-member Congress, marking a significant milestone for representation. With those steps, Micronesia is moving towards a stronger and more inclusive future.
Today we stand at a critical crossroads, where the future of our planet rests in the hands of our youth. It is not enough to speak of change — we must empower the next generation to lead it. Our young people are the innovators, the visionaries and the problem solvers, who will carry the torch of climate action and global justice. But they cannot do it alone. We must invest in their education and well-being, nurture their leadership and character. We must give them the tools to build a resilient, sustainable world. As leaders, we must ensure that our youth are not the inheritors of a dying planet, but the co-architects of its transformation.
In conclusion, the challenges we face — from climate change to conflict and from the health of our oceans to the well-being of our people — demand urgent and unified action. Let us not be discouraged by the magnitude of the tasks before us, but instead, be inspired by the opportunity we have to reshape our world for the better. The spirit of Kamorale teaches us that strength lies in unity, and in that spirit, I call on every nation represented here to act decisively, with courage and compassion. Let us work together with resolve and prioritize the protection of our planet, our people and our future.
The time for action is now. Let this General Assembly session be remembered not for the words spoken, but for the deeds done, for the promises kept and for the lasting legacy that we leave to coming generations. As the youth representative of South Sudan so rightly reminded us at the opening of the Summit of the Future (see A/79/PV.3), the future is for the youth to forge, not for us to cling to.
Micronesia is ready to play its part, and I urge all Member States to join us in this collective effort so that, together, we can build a world in which peace, prosperity and sustainability are not just aspirations, but realities for all of us. As enshrined in the preamble to our Constitution of the Federated States of Micronesia:
“Our ancestors, who made their homes on these islands, displaced no other people. We, who remain, wish no other home than this. Having known war, we hope for peace. Having been divided, we wish unity. Having been ruled, we seek freedom. […] We extend to all nations what we seek from each: peace, friendship, cooperation, and love in our common humanity.”
I thank the Assembly, and I leave with it Kamorale.
