On behalf of the Gabonese people, I am pleased to take part in the work of the General Assembly.
In speaking for the first time before the Assembly, I would first like to extend my warmest congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang on his outstanding election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, as well as my most ardent wishes for his success. I express those compliments as much to the seasoned diplomat that he is as to the representative of a brother country, Cameroon, linked to Gabon by geography, history and culture. He can rest assured of my country’s full support throughout his term.
I would also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres for his tireless dedication and commitment to the ideals of the United Nations.
I take this opportunity to call attention to the fact that these meetings are being held at a time when my country, Gabon, has just celebrated the first anniversary of the liberation coup. Indeed, the march towards the construction of a new Gabon has to this day kept the promises we pledged from this rostrum at the previous session of the General Assembly (see A/78/PV.10), including the establishment of the institutions of the Transition, the release of prisoners of conscience, permanent inclusiveness, the holding of an inclusive national dialogue and the drafting of a new Constitution. The next step is the organization of the referendum in the coming months, the adoption of an electoral code and the revision of the electoral register, in accordance with the timetable adopted during the inclusive national dialogue. All those advances, supported by the Gabonese people, greatly contribute to a gradual return to constitutional order through a free, transparent and peaceful election, to be held as soon as possible.
In addition to the points I have just raised, significant reforms have been undertaken in sectors that directly affect human development: roads, health centres, schools, the restoration of scholarships, the opening of competitive examinations for the major educational institutions, the unfreezing of recruitment and the payment of pension arrears, all while respecting our international commitments. I take this opportunity to thank all the partners, friendly countries and national and international donors that are supporting us in the Transition, despite the difficulties that characterize it.
This session of the General Assembly, under the President’s theme “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”, is being held in the context of the construction of a global community and in harmony with the principles set out in the preamble to the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Gabon, faithful to its tradition of peace, fully supports that project, which seeks a more just, inclusive and interactive world. In the aftermath of the liberation coup of 30 August 2023, which was carried out without bloodshed, we advocated the maintenance of peace and national unity by calling on all the vital forces of the nation, regardless of their origins, beliefs or social status, to join in efforts to build a more equitable and prosperous Gabon.
Respect for life, territorial integrity, the sovereignty of States to freely choose their partners and the rejection of violence promote the building of peace. In terms of sustainable development, my country maintains a firm and consistent position in favour of environmental protection. I recall that Gabon has for several years now dedicated 13 national parks to the service of humankind, contributing thereby to the absorption of more than 100 million net tons of carbon dioxide per year and the preservation of endangered species. However, there can be no question of putting the expectations of our people, who remain focused on meeting basic needs, on the back burner. That is why this platform offers an opportunity to once again remind the industrialized nations of the need to truly respect their commitments by supporting the countries that are home to the largest carbon reservoirs in the world.
On the security issue, like many of us, I believe that it is urgent to provide appropriate responses to the countless conflict situations that persist in the world, particularly in Africa. I would like once again to welcome the adoption by the Security Council, on 21 December 2023, of resolution 2719 (2023), on the financing of peace support operations led by the African Union. In line with the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace, that resolution, jointly presented by Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique, is today a crucial element of the architecture of international peace and security. Its implementation is a categorical imperative.
This is the right moment for me to express my support for the efforts of the Secretary-General to achieve a realistic, pragmatic and lasting political solution on the Moroccan Sahara.
I would also like to welcome the official announcement by the United States of America of its support for the admission of two African States as permanent members of the Security Council. However, Africa expects broader support from the other permanent members of the Security Council for that initiative, along with access to the right of veto for African members, in accordance with the Ezulwini Consensus. That would only be fair for our continent.
Beyond the African continent, I invite us to keep our focus on Gaza. It is more than ever time for a definitive peace to be established with a view to the harmonious coexistence of the Palestinian and Israeli States.
Similarly, I reiterate Gabon’s position in favour of lifting the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba in light of its negative impact on the well-being of the population.
As President Félix Houphouët-Boigny once said, “Peace is not just a word, but a behaviour, a true state of mind”. That legitimate aspiration of peoples is an ideal. It recommends that developed countries, which have experience in conflict resolution, share their know-how with other States for a fairer and more balanced world. Unity in diversity for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity everywhere and for all is, in my opinion, the culmination of a true society of dialogue, tolerance and respect for others. It should help us build a world of peace where development would be adapted to the needs of all people and nations.
Concerning the economic and financial issue, the Sustainable Development Report 2024 once again underlines the urgent need to mobilize massive financing in order to fill the financing gap in the global economy, estimated at several billion dollars per year. It is a reality that the current international financial system does not allow investments to be directed towards development and thus to ensure the dignity of our populations, to which our theme this year calls us. I therefore share the firm determination of several of my peers to achieve the reform of global financial institutions that is crucial to free up financing for developing countries.
My country, Gabon, resolutely engaged in its march towards happiness, intends to fully play its role for the effective advent of the more concerted, humane community that is strongly desired by all. Together, let us pool our efforts for the hope of a better destiny, by acting differently for the preservation of the human race.
