It is a great honour to be here today to address so many different nations of the world.
We are a Government that believes that Georgia inherently deserves to be a peaceful, stable and developed country. With that in mind, over the past decade we have ensured that Georgia develops along that trajectory. We have made some tough choices and have never been afraid of the challenge. We have never chosen an easy path and we have always prioritized our nation and our people. As a result, we are reclaiming our nation’s pride — the pride and dignity that a country with 3,000 years of history deserves.
We gather here at a time of unprecedented global challenges, when interlinking crises of escalating conflicts, climate change and rising humanitarian needs remain complex. Those challenges require bold actions. Georgia has never been afraid of bold actions. The past couple of years have been difficult for our region. While we should be concentrating on global challenges, such as development and problem-solving, the ongoing war in Ukraine has caused an unprecedented level of uncertainty and a humanitarian crisis. I would like to underline once again that Georgia’s support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders remains firm and unwavering.
Understanding first-hand the importance of peace, we have led the effort to transform our immediate South Caucasus region from a region of conflicts into a region of opportunities. We welcome the process of peaceful settlement between Armenia and Azerbaijan, and in particular the efforts aimed at normalizing relations with neighbouring countries. We have been and are willing to provide a regional cooperation format that will support collaboration and trust-building among countries to make sure that differences are left in the past and that we move forward together to capitalize on all the resources and advantages our region has to offer the world.
Georgia’s strategic location, serving as a natural bridge between Europe and Asia, makes it the shortest route between East and West. With our sea access and strong relations with China, as well as Central Asian countries, Georgia is a key player in the regional and broader Eurasian context. We are a hub not only for the exchange of goods, but also for energy transit and much more. Georgia ensures that seven landlocked countries of the South Caucasus and Central Asia are connected with the rest of the world via our port infrastructure, which we are committed to further developing with the soon-to-commence construction of the Anaklia deep-sea port.
If we look at the political map, Georgia is the single safest and most reliable transit route to ensure the timely and efficient movement of goods and services. Our commitment to maintaining and enhancing our role as a reliable transit corridor ensures that we are able to support our strategic partners in Europe with their energy security needs. By diversifying supply routes and investing in robust infrastructure, Georgia can offer additional predictability in East-West connectivity, especially within the framework of the Middle Corridor initiative.
As we all know, the past couple of years have brought significant challenges. Despite those multiple tests, Georgia has demonstrated remarkable resilience to such external shocks. Our average annual economic growth since 2021 has been 9.7 per cent. Thanks to strong macroeconomic fundamentals and fiscal discipline, the Government debt and the fiscal deficit have declined to 39.3 per cent and 2.5 per cent, respectively. Additionally, Georgia has maintained one of the lowest regional inflation rates, further showcasing its economic stability.
Despite significant economic improvement and the cutting of the poverty rate in half over the past 10 years, further reducing poverty and inequality is at the heart of Georgia’s socioeconomic development agenda. In 2023, the employment rate showed significant improvement, coinciding with an increase in the labour force participation rate. The positive trend continued in the first half of 2024 as well, when the unemployment rate decreased to a record low of 13.7 per cent.
Georgia’s effective performance is duly reflected in international rankings from the world’s most reputable agencies. The Global Competitiveness Survey of the World Economic Forum ranks Georgia twentieth in the world and eleventh in Europe in terms of corruption control, while in terms of the rule of law Georgia ranks twenty-ninth in the world and fourteenth in Europe. The International Budget Partnership’s Open Budget Survey ranks Georgia first in terms of budget transparency globally. The Transparency in the Time of War report of the European Research Centre for Anticorruption and State-Building placed Georgia seventeenth in its 2023 ranking, ahead of 15 European Union (EU) member States and four Group of Seven States. Additionally, Georgia is the twenty-fifth freest economy in the world, according to the Fraser Institute’s Economic Freedom of the World report, once again ahead of many leading economies. The Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom ranks Georgia nineteenth in Europe and thirty-second globally, once again ahead of many EU countries;
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Regulatory Restrictiveness Index, Georgia ranked eighth among more than 80 countries as one of the most open economies in the world in terms of attracting investments. That is the reason why Georgia’s FDI-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratio is one of the highest among peer countries. FDI in 2023 amounted to $1.9 billion, representing 6.2 per cent of GDP. In the post-pandemic period to date, Georgia has attracted $6.2 billion in FDI, further supplementing Georgia’s transformation into a regional multifunctional hub that serves all things business. Even though we hosted more than 7 million tourists last year, showing a strong bounce back in post-coronavirus disease recovery, Georgia still maintains one of the lowest crime rates globally. According to Numbeo, Georgia ranks eighth in Europe and twenty-first globally, thanks to our law enforcement agencies and professionals.
Despite the fact that 20 per cent of our territories are under illegal occupation, we continue to thrive, continue to grow and continue to make sure that our children live in a better, stronger and more dignified Georgia. We are diligent and tireless in our quest to make sure Georgia is a country that every citizen is proud of.
I want to take this opportunity to address our people on the other side of occupation line, in the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions. Whatever actions we take are done to help our people so that one day, with our children, we can live together in one happy, united and developed Georgia. On this side of the occupation line, we will always meet them with an open heart. We have to rebuild all the broken bridges in our country.
In conclusion, Georgia is at a pivotal point in its modern history, and we as the Government of the people are determined to guide our country in the best interests of the nation, to make sure we overcome all our challenges and to become stronger and more successful than ever before. We are optimistic that Georgia’s desire to become a full-fledged member of the European Union will be achieved by 2030.
As we look ahead to the future with a commitment to shaping a prosperous community together with our allies and partners, our united efforts will persist in supporting peace-building measures and sustainable development. In doing so, we will advance human dignity, not only for the citizens of Georgia today, but also for the well-being of all future generations to come.
