I would like to offer my congratulations to Mr. Philémon Yang of the Republic of Cameroon on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I wish him much success in a very complex international context. I also congratulate his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, on the results he achieved during his term. To Secretary-General António Guterres, I express our acknowledgement of his deep commitment to serving our common ideals and goals in a very difficult international landscape.
The world is facing grave challenges. The obligation to follow the principles and deliver on the promises of the Charter of the United Nations is a burden that each one of us carries. We are witnessing devastating wars, the intensification of regional tensions and other grave threats to international peace and security. Hundreds of millions of people continue to live in extreme poverty, without the basic means of subsistence, hope for a better future or human dignity. Implementing reforms in global economic and financial governance to make it more just, inclusive and equitable has become even more urgent. That is the only way to build adequate responses to the challenges facing humankind. We must fight more effectively against poverty and social exclusion through concrete action. Specifically, we must strive to finance development programmes, reduce inequalities, protect the environment and mitigate the effects of climate change.
Eight decades after the United Nations was established in 1945, we live today in a totally different world. We continue to call for the reform of the Security Council, which must consider the interests of Africa under the terms of the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration of the Heads of State and Government of the African Union. We must reform the international financial architecture in order to promote greater inclusion, particularly in Africa, and to consider the African continent’s role in and contribution to the world economy. In that context, we welcome the Summit of the Future. We hope that the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) can drive collective efforts towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want of the African Union. As a member of the global task force on social protection for nutrition, human capital and local economic development of the Group of Seven Plus, we will work with the other members to eradicate hunger and progressively achieve all SDGs.
In the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, we are firmly committed to fostering dialogue, national reconciliation, the consolidation of democracy, the rule of law and our country’s sustainable development. Despite the negative impact of the challenging world economic and financial situation, the economy of Guinea-Bissau continues to grow as a result of sound public policies. The practice of accountability has provided greater transparency in the State’s economic and financial management. We have adopted measures that, although difficult, were shown to be necessary to drive the private sector and create a more solid foundation for a dynamic and inclusive economy.
We are promoting the greater participation of women and youth entrepreneurs. We are investing in building and improving basic infrastructure, such as roads, and other projects. We have declared war on corruption and organized crime. We have been able to restore trust in our relations with international financial institutions and other bilateral and multilateral partners. We continue to place faith in strengthening Guinea-Bissau’s bonds of friendship and cooperation with the world. We remain steadfast in our support for the policy of peacebuilding and peaceful resolution of conflicts in West Africa and the world in general. To that end, in recent months, I made visits of friendship and work to Russia, Ukraine, Israel and Palestine. In that context, I reiterate my call for an end to the unjust and very harmful embargo to which our brothers and sisters in Cuba have been subjected for decades.
I recently had the honour of serving Africa as Chair of the African Leaders Malaria Alliance. We made significant progress in a very difficult world environment. We endeavoured to garner support to replenish the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. We worked with the private sector to promote the production of drugs and nets to combat malaria. We encouraged the transfer of technologies to African companies. We launched councils and funds to end malaria and supported youth movements against malaria. Despite all the progress achieved, challenges persist. In the next three years, the Alliance will run a $1.5 billion deficit. Global warming and rains associated with climate change are expanding the geographic reach of mosquitoes, thereby exposing more than 170 million people on the African continent to the threat of malaria. I take this opportunity to congratulate the Alliance’s Executive Secretary for her remarkable service. I also thank all partners of the Alliance for their crucial support in the fight against malaria during my term in office.
In conclusion, on behalf of the people of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and on my own behalf, I would like to reaffirm our determination to continue strengthening the friendship among countries and peoples to promote international cooperation, multilateralism, the peaceful resolution of conflict and the end of wars and the suffering of innocent populations, towards peace in the world.
