On behalf of Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, I would like to begin by congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang on his unanimous election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, as well as the other members of the Bureau. We assure him of the absolute certainty that he will enjoy the support and cooperation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea during the term of his presidency.
We also congratulate outgoing President Mr. Dennis Francis, whose presidency marked the adoption of very important resolutions that summarize the brilliant leadership and outstanding dynamism that he was able to bring to his presidency.
The theme of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development, and human dignity for present and future generations”, is a topic that is in line with the current global situation, which faces such enormous global challenges as armed conflicts, the exacerbation of the existence of armed groups, terrorism, crises generated by climate change, organized criminal gangs, the prospect of new health crises and discrimination, as well as the food crisis arising armed conflicts that cause or are likely to cause famine in various countries.
Indeed, that panorama obliges us all to recognize the need and importance of giving greater priority to the multilateralism and international cooperation that are so necessary to addressing the global challenges that humankind faces today, as well as to promoting sustained economic growth and sustainable development, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences.
Equatorial Guinea remains unchanged in its position regarding the conflicts that are currently taking place in all regions and some countries and the need to prioritize the search by all possible means for the end of hostilities and the prevalence of peace in the world through preventive diplomacy, negotiations and inclusive dialogues. We call on the countries engaged in ongoing conflicts and all Governments that are directly or indirectly involved in them owing to geostrategic, economic, neocolonialist or other interests to prioritize dialogue and inclusive negotiations in a realistic and pragmatic manner to resolve those conflicts.
The proliferation of so many conflicts in all regions of the world is the greatest evidence of the obsolescence, incapacity and ineffectiveness of the Security Council today. What we are seeing in that decision-making body are the struggles for geostrategic interests that make it increasingly difficult to take unanimous decisions to resolve conflict situations and alleviate the suffering of populations and the loss of innocent lives.
That is why there is a justification for the urgent need to reform the Security Council to put an end to its obsolete configuration, which dates back to 1945 and prevails to this day, with Africa as its main victim, suffering from a grave historical injustice and the lack of application of international law, as it is the only continent that lacks permanent representation on the Security Council. Africa, within the framework of the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, has been demanding for more than 20 years the correction of that injustice through the allocation to Africa of two permanent seats, with all the prerogatives and rights reserved for members of that category, and five additional non-permanent seats in the Security Council. We hope that the contacts that are taking place between the permanent members and the African Union Committee of Ten in the context of that issue will achieve satisfactory results that benefit all the interested parties in order to create a Security Council capable of promoting a more just, peaceful, equitable and prosperous world for all.
Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about the increasingly serious situation that the countries of the Sahel are enduring, with very negative implications for the development of those countries and which directly and indirectly affects the countries of the subregion. The situation is the result of interference, pressure and blockades that countries of the global South are subjected to by some countries, whose sole purpose is to cause destabilization and paralyse the efforts of African countries to achieve prosperity for their people.
No country is exempt from internal problems. However, some countries have insisted on being judges and arbitrators to intervene and give lessons to other countries on sovereign equality, meddling in their internal affairs with manifest interference. All countries of the world, as sovereign States, have the right to decide with which country they wish to maintain relations and sign bilateral agreements that benefit their respective Governments and peoples.
We do not understand why the embargo against Cuba has not been completely lifted or why the economic, commercial and financial blockade that has been imposed on that country for several decades has not been ended. Equatorial Guinea calls for the immediate lifting of the embargo imposed against Cuba and its exclusion from the notorious list of States that allegedly sponsor terrorism. The lifting of the embargo is even more necessary now that we have adopted by consensus the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which advocates leaving no country behind.
It is more than clear that African economies can become important players in global supply chains, taking advantage of their vast resources of raw materials needed for high-tech sectors and their own growing consumer markets. That is why Africa deserves priority attention in development support and financing initiatives, with a decisive materialization of sustainable development financing commitments for the implementation of the objectives contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063, and in order to leave no one behind.
Equatorial Guinea is committed to the promotion and protection of human rights as a global issue, including the plan for the rights of children; the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related forms of intolerance; the rights of disabled people; the right to food and housing; and the right of countries to exploit and commercialize their natural resources to meet the needs of their populations. In that context, we have also seen the systematic violation of humanitarian rights in ongoing armed conflicts, depriving populations in conflict zones of the necessary humanitarian aid in the form of food and health care.
Equatorial Guinea expresses its great concern about the crisis in Haiti and recognizes the need to carry out an in-depth analysis of the chronic crisis situation that has been ravaging that country in order to find a sustainable solution. To that end, we continue to propose the holding of a United Nations international conference for Haiti.
I conclude by reiterating our congratulations to our brother Mr. Philemon Yang, wishing him every success during his presidency of the General Assembly and assuring him of the full support of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
