This is the sixth time I have addressed the General Assembly as Greece’s Prime Minister, but it is the first time I stand here as the leader of a country that is an incoming member of the Security Council. Greece is honoured to accept that responsibility for the third time, and I am personally grateful for the trust that the broader membership has placed in our candidacy for the 2025–2026 term. Three words of Greek origin but of universal meaning will guide Greece’s upcoming term on the Security Council: dialogue, diplomacy and democracy. Six core priorities underpin those guiding principles: the peaceful settlement of disputes; respect for international law and the rules and principles of the Charter of the United Nations; women, peace and security; climate, peace and security; children in armed conflict; and of course, as we a seafaring nation, maritime security.
Addressing the Assembly today, 12 months on from the last time we met in September 2023 (see A/78/PV.9), I do not think any of us can claim that we are somehow better off now than we were back then. If anything, our world grows less secure by the day. Whether it be escalating conflicts, geopolitical division, the climate crisis, mass migration, rising inequality or even the unchecked rise of artificial intelligence, those challenges jeopardize our present and our future. And yet, within those threats lie unique opportunities to transform the way we live, govern and cooperate on a global scale. We are indeed at an inflection point — what happens next depends to a high degree on international cooperation. It is here, in this Hall, where we represent the collective voice of the international community and where we are called to act for the good of all humankind. To do that effectively, we must reinvigorate and strengthen the multilateral system.
Most if not all of us have agreed on the need to reform the United Nations and especially the Security Council. Since it first sat in 1946, the Security Council has not undergone any significant institutional reform. In that sense, it is a relic of a world that no longer exists. Back then, it was fit to address the challenges and opportunities of the post-Second World War world, but today it is not fit to solve the complex problems of the present. As far as Security Council reform is concerned, I believe we all agree that it is essential to increase the meaningful participation of underrepresented regions. Nearly a third of Member States have never sat on the Security Council. In addition, the enlargement of the Security Council must include both non-permanent and permanent members. New permanent members must include leading countries from all continents. The composition of the Security Council should reflect the geopolitical and economic realities of the third decade of the twenty-first century, not the fifth decade of the twentieth century.
In the Security Council, Greece will do its utmost to serve as a stabilizing actor. That work begins immediately, in our immediate neighbourhood. After all, as a gateway to Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, Greece sits 900 miles away from both Gaza and Ukraine. A year ago, we did not know that, on 7 October 2023, a horrific terrorist attack would leave more than 1,200 innocent civilians — men, women and children — massacred, that approximately 250 people would be taken hostage and that in the war that ensued more than 41,000 people would perish. The ongoing violence in the Middle East is grave, and horrendous civilian suffering in Gaza is unfortunately continuing. Escalation threatens to trigger a full-scale war in the region. Greece calls on all parties, including Iran and those over which it has influence, to back away from perpetuating the current destructive cycle of violence, to lower tensions and to engage constructively in the pursuit of meaningful de-escalation. A full-scale war in southern Lebanon must be avoided at all costs. People on both sides of the border have a right to live peacefully without the threat of rockets and bombs shattering their lives. Greece fully supports the proposal for an immediate 21-day ceasefire.
In the wake of the 7 October 2023 attacks, Greece has always supported, and will always support, Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself, but how it does so matters. We must see the immediate return of all remaining hostages. There must be an immediate ceasefire in Gaza. The humanitarian catastrophe there cannot go on. Safe access to food, water, shelter, clothing and medicines throughout the territory must be ensured, and international humanitarian law must be respected. However remote and however impossible it may seem today, Israelis and Palestinians must be given the chance to live side by side in peace and security. There is no other way of achieving that than making the two-State solution a reality. There is an absolute need to give the Palestinians hope for the future. This is a sine qua non for peace, stability and security in the region, including the long-term security of Israel. Building a fully functioning and sovereign Palestinian State will take concerted efforts by all sides involved — the actors in the wider region and, of course, the international community as a whole. There is no other option to bring about lasting peace in that turbulent part of the world.
A year ago, we were already in the second year of Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine. Since February 2022, Russia has brought violence, misery and destruction back to the European continent. Tens of thousands have been killed. Millions have been displaced from their homes. The impact on civilian infrastructure and peoples’ lives and livelihoods is colossal. We stand in solidarity with the Ukrainian people, who are fighting for their freedom and independence and for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of their country. Respect for the territorial integrity of all States is the fundamental pillar of international law and the cornerstone of the Charter of the United Nations.
In June, at the Summit on Peace in Ukraine, Greece stood shoulder-to-shoulder with many other United Nations Member States in calling for a just and lasting peace in Ukraine, with full respect for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders. From the first hours of the Russian aggression, the European Union (EU) and its member States rose to the occasion, providing every possible support to the Ukrainians. We are committed to continuing to do so. Why? The answer is simple: the war in Ukraine is not simply another local or a regional European conflict. It is a brutal challenge to international stability and to the international rules-based order for which the United Nations stands. As such, it concerns the entire global community. It is needless to also recall the very concrete impact that the war has had on international food security, affecting economies and the basic needs of populations around the world, especially in Africa.
Greece is situated, by virtue of its geography, in a complicated neighbourhood, and I have repeatedly spoken from this rostrum on the difficult and at times tense relationship with neighbouring Türkiye. Over the past year, I met with President Erdoğan six times, including recently on the sidelines of the Assembly, a couple of days ago. Last December, we signed the Athens declaration, a document stating our intention to resolve our differences according to the principles of international law and in the spirit of good-neighbourly relations. We will continue to explore how to improve bilateral relations with Türkiye. There is potential for increased cooperation to tackle common challenges, such as climate change and migration. We will continue to keep channels of communication open to defuse any tension that may arise.
Greece is willing to work towards resolving the only major outstanding issue that we have with our neighbour: the delimitation of the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone in the Aegean and the Eastern Mediterranean. We have not been able to effectively address that difference for more than 40 years. But that does not mean that it is destined to remain unresolved. I was glad to hear President Erdoğan say that the delimitation of maritime zones in accordance with international law is in the common interest of the entire Eastern Mediterranean region. I strongly believe that we have today a window of opportunity and that we should be bold and wise enough to seize that chance. But if we are to try, we should both adopt a consistent approach in every aspect of our behaviour towards each other.
On the other hand, when it comes to Cyprus, with this year marking the fiftieth anniversary of Türkiye’s illegal invasion and subsequent occupation of more than a third of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus, we unfortunately see no progress in Türkiye’s position. That invasion was and remains a violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations. As Prime Minister of Greece, I reaffirm here today our commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and to a solution on the basis of a bizonal, bicommunal federation, with a single sovereignty, a single citizenship and a single international personality, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. A two-State solution cannot and will not be accepted. It is simply not a solution.
Yesterday, from this podium, President Christodoulides gave an impassioned and sincere address, recalling the violence and trauma of the invasion of Cyprus 50 years ago. He also expressed his unwavering commitment to engaging in order to find a solution. I, for one, have absolute trust in that commitment. He is right to argue that international law cannot be applied à la carte and that history cannot be rewritten or erased. Greece fully supports the efforts of the Secretary-General towards the resumption of negotiations within that framework. We call upon Türkiye and the Turkish Cypriot community to come to the negotiating table, to at least establish mutual trust and to engage in a frank and honest discussion in pursuit of a mutually acceptable, just and viable solution. Imagine how powerful a message for the world community it would send to all those seeking peace in seemingly intractable conflicts around the world, if we could find a permanent, viable and just solution to the Cyprus question.
Let me also mention the other side of our neighbourhood — the Western Balkans — and its future. As the oldest European Union member in the region, Greece has always had a vision of the Western Balkans being within the European Union family, a vision that would reduce tensions and conflict and embed the rule of law and fundamental freedoms, driving development and prosperity for its people. There has been progress, but that progress has not been enough. Twenty-one years after the Thessaloniki Agenda, significant challenges remain. Allow me to be very frank: the countries of the Western Balkans need to take the definitive decision to leave behind the traumatic legacy of the past. The political leadership of the Western Balkans needs to choose, through action, not words, to embrace a European future by improving democratic governance, consolidating the rule of law and freedom of expression, pursuing difficult internal reforms and, — very importantly, — committing to good-neighbourly relations.
Reviving nationalist narratives and agendas should have no place today in a region on the cusp of joining the EU. Let us start with the basics: international agreements must be respected and implemented fully and in good faith, whether we are talking about Dayton, or Prespa or the Belgrade-Pristina agreements. There are disruptors who would like nothing more than to cause new divisions in this sensitive corner of Europe. It is time to relegate the famous phrase of Winston Churchill, that the Balkans produce more history than they can consume, once and for all to the history books.
Let me conclude by addressing briefly two issues critical to our shared future: the advent of artificial intelligence (AI) and the adverse effects of digital technology, especially on our children and our teenagers.
The power of AI seems limitless, a technology with the potential to change our world in a way that will probably surpass the advent of the personal computer, the launch of the mobile phone or the birth of the worldwide web. Like steam or electricity before it, AI as a general technology presents a huge opportunity to transform for good the way we live, collaborate and progress as humankind. If used correctly, it could very well be driving solutions across science, climate change, research and development and medicine. For our Governments, AI has enormous power to enhance productivity, facilitate more effective decision-making and deliver more efficient and higher-impact public services. It is indeed a game-changer. However, AI also has the potential to do extraordinary harm. Unchecked, and in the hands of malign actors, AI could yet become a weapon of control in an uncertain world order. We are already seeing how generative AI is used to create more and more convincing deepfakes, designed to spread misinformation and disinformation.
It is not lost on me, standing here, in this Assembly, created to protect peace and security and promote global dialogue, that our world is being shaped by transnational actors in the form of a few very large technology companies, with more economic muscle than most of the countries represented here. This is leading to an imbalance that we must address. Those driving the technologies that are fundamentally reshaping societies are essentially not accountable, and that needs to change. They, like us, in the end have a responsibility towards humankind. Unlike with climate change, on which we continue to convene globally to discuss national contributions, every year, within the context of a global problem, with AI there is no such framework. The European Union is trying to rectify that but, just as with climate, the EU alone cannot address this challenge. And here I would like to praise the final report, “Governing AI for Humanity”, presented just a few days ago by the High-Level Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence, established by the Secretary-General. The recommendations of this report can truly contribute to an agile and adaptable regime of global governance of AI that helps to showcase the benefits of AI and address its risks.
Bluntly, if both the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) and the Global Digital Compact (ibid., annex I), which we adopted this week, are to have any effect, then we may need to put the regulation and application of AI on a global footing. Eventually, what we may need is a conference of the parties for AI, with the participation not just of countries but also of the global technology companies.
This is an issue of the outmost urgency for one additional reason, and let me conclude with that. We are already witnessing the adverse effects of digital technology and AI-driven algorithms on the mental health of our children and our teenagers. It took more than a quarter of a century for campaigners to install seat belts in cars, despite the fact that all the evidence pointed to belts saving lives. We are in a similar situation today when it comes to children and teenagers and their use of digital and social media platforms. Every day, children around the world are being exposed to content that exacerbates feelings of loneliness and unrealistic standards of beauty. Frequently, our teenagers are pulled into extremist echo chambers. Bullying, once contained to the real world, now has its virtual twin. It follows children home from school and materializes on phones and tablets in bedrooms. Social media algorithms are constantly improved by AI to keep children online for the maximum amount of time and away from the real world of unsupervised play, and all for the purpose of making money. Countless studies have shown that heavy use of social media is linked to depression, feelings of isolation, sleep deprivation and addiction. The brains of our children are being rewired, and their development changed on an almost unimaginable scale. Yet we do nothing, or very little.
That is why I applaud initiatives such as the one announced by Australia for putting an age limit on social media use, with age verification technologies that cannot be circumvented. Others should follow suit. Technology companies must come to the table and show that they will take tangible and measurable action and prioritize safety over profits. If they do not, pragmatic solutions like banning devices in our schools — which Greece has implemented as of this year — will be complemented by harsher regulatory responses. Digital technology is no different than any other industry that needs to operate under health and safety regulations. The overarching principle, the golden standard, is one and the same: do no harm.
We live in a rapidly changing world. We cannot let our differences be an excuse for inaction. As Greece takes its seat on the Security Council, we do so mindful of the importance of our core principles: dialogue, diplomacy and democracy. This week’s Summit of the Future demonstrates that it is truly possible, when we work together, to renew multilateral cooperation through those principles. In reiterating the commitment of all Member States to the core values of the United Nations, we can still galvanize international resolve and forge innovative partnerships to address both the world’s current and its emerging challenges. Greece stands ready to help the United Nations to do its part in the two years ahead.
