The people of Guatemala welcome the world. I am greeting the General Assembly in the language of the K’iche’ people, one of the most populous and influential ancestral communities in Guatemala. Their strength and that of the diverse peoples of Guatemala is the backbone of our Government and the vitality of our country. It is the resounding voice of those who have not been heard and have been marginalized but who have much to say and contribute, and who have a place in building our collective future. I am here as a result of two clear expressions of popular will.
The first is a vote that categorically rejected the representatives of Guatemala’s authoritarian history and corrupt past and granted me the honour of electing me President to lead the national effort to advance towards a future of justice, equality and progress. The second is the defence of that decision, which Guatemalan society made at the polls and reaffirmed and defended in various ways in the streets when a corrupt minority attempted to prolong its stay in power and cheat democracy. Our democracy would not be complete, nor could it exist, without the determined and courageous drive of the Mayan peoples of Guatemala, the mestizo people, the Garinagu people of the Caribbean and the Xinca people. It is a democracy that comes from the four cardinal points — the four peoples — that together make up our nation. The role of our Government is to give a sense of unity to that diversity and to advance towards a prosperous and inclusive future.
I want to express Guatemala’s special gratitude to the countries, peoples and Governments that were with us, the people of Guatemala, in that historic feat in 2023, and our gratitude for the support they have continued to give us in our effort to rescue our democratic institutions. We are doing it through dialogue that is framed in a great national consensus, something that all Guatemalans share, beyond our ideological differences, cultural diversity and different ways of seeing the world. And I am sure that everyone here can agree on one thing. We cannot continue to tolerate corruption. Corruption — when a few exploit what belongs to everyone in order to enrich themselves — is like a shackle that tethers us to the past and prevents us from growing, prospering and building a society based on the common good.
In the case of Guatemala, corruption has its roots in an authoritarian past of repression, political violence and social exclusion. But we are freeing ourselves. We are freeing ourselves from the chains of the dark past and emerging as a young, creative, vital, joyful and restless nation that cannot remain silent in the face of injustice and corruption. We have a diverse community that is building a future where everyone fits in, where opportunities are abundant and where collaboration and solidarity enhance ingenuity, creativity and individual effort. It is a future where parents can sleep peacefully knowing that their children’s health and educational opportunities will be guaranteed. It is a future where work will be fairly compensated and where prosperity will not require immoral acts of corruption. It is a future where the Earth — our Earth — will be treated with gratitude and respect and in return will give us clean spaces in which to work, live, enjoy ourselves and grow. That is the future we are building for Guatemala. That future will not emerge in a vacuum. We have imagined it by looking inward, towards our principles, values and world view. Our Government is made up of the diverse peoples of Guatemala, and the values and vision of those four peoples are the instruments that we have for navigating the sea of our transformation.
In the same way, this forum, which is so vital to global coexistence and the progress of all nations, must look inward, return to its fundamental values and use them to navigate the complex reality that we face today as a planet. It is time to rescue multilateralism, revitalize dialogue for peace and take concrete actions to solve the urgent problems confronting us.
Let us begin at the beginning. War, the horror that prompted the establishment of this global forum, has once again captured our attention. While it has been a constant reality, it has taken on an unexpected intensity in the past two years. We must not tolerate it. We cannot tolerate war. We must not ignore the international conflicts that affect the peace and security of all. We must not abandon the hope of a world free of war and of a future in peace. Guatemala reiterates its solidarity with the nations that are suffering from armed conflicts and wars that they did not choose. We call on all Member States to redouble regional and international efforts to find peaceful solutions to these conflicts, based on respect for international law and international humanitarian law and the fundamental principle of human dignity. We cannot accept any violation of the Charter of the United Nations or of Security Council resolutions by any Member State of this Organization — not in Ukraine, Gaza, the Sudan or anywhere else in the world.
Rescuing multilateralism, which is a principle fundamental to the international system, is an urgent and unavoidable commitment for each of the nations that make up this forum if we truly and sincerely want a future of peace and progress. Only fundamental reforms can enable us to return to the path proposed at the Organization’s founding in 1945. In a multipolar world, we need new approaches adapted to the emerging needs of nations. We support reforming the Security Council so as to restore a collective, peaceful and democratic approach to its actions. It is not acceptable that decisions in support of peace are not adopted because of a right exercised by a few — the right of veto — thereby making it impossible to take forceful decisions against States that repeatedly violate the Charter of this Organization. We would like to remind the members of the Security Council of their primary responsibility to maintain international peace and security, and of the fact that in the performance of their duties they must proceed in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
As part of its commitment to peace, Guatemala is currently contributing 213 personnel — military observers and staff officers — to seven United Nations peacekeeping missions, a contribution that we are proud of. Our professionalism and experience in that area have made us internationally recognized as one of the countries contributing the most to peace in Latin America and the Caribbean. I want to share with the General Assembly that we are finalizing the administrative procedures to concretize our participation and deployment of a military police contingent in the Multinational Security Support Mission in Haiti, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2699 (2023). Guatemala is ready to support all efforts aimed at restoring security and stability in Haiti, the first modern independent nation in our hemisphere and one with which we, all the countries of the Americas, share historical ties of responsibility.
We have known for a long time that an attack on human dignity anywhere in the world is an attack on all of humankind. Peace is therefore an imperative for the world order. We can all contribute. We must all do our part. That idea is at the heart and the existence of this Organization. In the same vein, the Organization has the obligation to maintain and increase its cooperation to ensure the protection of migrants, displaced persons and people who, for political, social, economic or environmental reasons, have moved to other territories. Our Government is committed to transforming the relationship between the State of Guatemala and those Guatemalans who reside outside our territory but continue to be an integral part of our nation and whose work is a fundamental part of our economy. We accomplish that through a strategy that enables the effective participation in our national development efforts of people in the diaspora by making them our partners in projects aimed at improving living conditions for the families that have remained in Guatemala.
In the future that we are building, migration is a right and an option — it is not a sentence resulting from a lack of opportunity or violence or hunger. Over the past decade, Guatemala has changed from being a country of origin for migrants to increasingly becoming a country of transit and return and even to a lesser extent a country of destination. We are committed to providing dignified treatment for all persons who arrive in our territory, consistent with the treatment that we demand for Guatemalans abroad. Our State is making substantial changes in the care and protection it provides to migrants. We have identified areas of improvement and opportunities to strengthen the management of international migration flows in a safe, orderly and regular manner.
I personally believe, along with my Government and the vast majority of Guatemalans, that all migrants deserve the opportunity of a dignified life and respect for their fundamental rights, regardless of the reasons which have caused them to migrate. That is why we firmly believe in the work being carried out by the United Nations system. Guatemala supports the achievement of the 23 objectives outlined in the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, which promote international cooperation in the field of migration. It was in the same spirit that my country received 135 Nicaraguan brothers and sisters upon their release from arbitrary imprisonment by their Government. Guatemala’s promise is to always be a place of dignity and freedom for those who arrive in our territory, especially Central Americans, who are — in our Constitution, our history and the general sentiment of our people — our fellow citizens and brothers.
Guatemala reaffirms its commitment to the fundamental principles of democracy, as set forth in the Inter-American Democratic Charter and as a fundamental principle of the political orientation of our peoples. We reject, in our hemisphere and around the world, any attempt to repress the aspirations for freedom and justice expressed by the peoples of the world through free and democratic processes, such as those unfolding right now in Venezuela and Nicaragua. The principles of democracy are fundamental for preserving the freedom, the dignity and the inclusive and equitable prosperity of humankind.
I would like to reiterate to the General Assembly Guatemala’s commitment to permanently and definitively resolving, before the International Court of Justice, the territorial, insular and maritime dispute with our neighbour and brotherly country, Belize. By opting for dialogue and international legal mechanisms, we have demonstrated that peaceful means and compliance with multilateral institutions are the most effective methods for resolving disputes between nations. We are confident that process will lead to a just and definitive solution that respects the rights and dignity of both countries. Those actions demonstrate our faith in international law and our commitment to a lasting peace, not only for Guatemala and Belize but as an example for the region and the world.
The urgency of the challenges before us demands that we take concrete action rather than limiting ourselves to mere words. Many others who have spoken before me agree that it is time for action. The conflicts and migration in Central America are fuelled by what we see as the most urgent global challenge: the climate crisis, which puts our systems, our economies, our food and our very survival at risk. We are in a moment that is critical for safeguarding current and succeeding generations. Climate change is a devastating reality that not only affects humankind today but will also have catastrophic consequences for the future. Guatemala, despite the country’s extremely varied landscape, is very vulnerable to the extreme weather events that cause natural disasters, floods, landslides and fires — and the increased temperatures that we have all witnessed this year. My country’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions is minimal; yet, along with a handful of other States, we bear the brunt of extreme weather events. We are adapting to that reality and reducing the level of vulnerability of the country. In 2025, we will submit our updated nationally determined contribution, in compliance with the commitments established in the Paris Agreement.
But we in this Hall must remember that we have a shared responsibility to address the climate crisis. The responsibility for taking action to resolve it falls to those of us who are bearing the brunt of the crisis, but also to those who have caused it. We urgently call on the major Powers to assume their roles as leaders and shoulder their moral and financial responsibilities to the nations suffering the worst effects of the crisis. The time to act is now. It is essential to ensure a successful outcome of the next twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Azerbaijan. Guatemala is fully committed to achieving that goal.
Guatemala is changing and that change implies a transformation of our relationship with the world. We are doing our part to contribute to achieving the goals of the Organization, based on our normative commitment to the values of peace and global solidarity, as well as the democratic mandate we have embraced. Our people firmly believe that democracy is a necessary condition for progress and well-being. Guatemala has a very recent authoritarian past — a tragic past with which many here in the General Assembly Hall are familiar. However, in supporting our people’s vocation for freedom and with the significant support of the international community, we have made a commitment to promote and defend human rights. We are seriously addressing the country’s historical problems and courageously taking on the responsibility of resolving its contemporary problems. The recent visit to Guatemala by United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Volker Türk and the immediate signing of a new agreement to extend the presence of his Office’s presence in Guatemala are a testament to that commitment.
Guatemala renewed its commitment to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals during the recent adoption of the Pact of the Future (resolution 79/1) in the framework of the Summit of the Future. We are convinced that economic growth alone does not create development. Cooperation, environmental protection, social inclusion, the respect for and the promotion of human dignity and security are the indispensable preconditions for development.
Guatemala is changing. We are moving towards a more equitable future in which development and progress will reach every corner of the country, especially the most neglected populations, and in which every person, regardless of their origin, will have the possibility of building a dignified and fulfilling life. That is the natural aspiration of all peoples. We will do our part to achieve it in Guatemala and we will collaborate to achieve it wherever it is required. But we are doing so because we know that the world is changing. It is up to us, as nations united in this forum, to ensure that such a change — which is already in the making and unstoppable — is for the well-being of our peoples and our nations. Such was the vision of those who founded this Organization 79 years ago and such is the vision that must guide our efforts as humankind today.
I conclude by quoting the sacred book of the Mayan people, the Popol Vuh, which reflects the sentiment that all must rise up and no one should be left behind.
