I stand before the Assembly as the President of Honduras, the representative of a people that has resisted oppression, exploitation and structural violence brought to bear over centuries. Today I am threatened by the same forces of capital that 15 years ago carried out a coup d’état against the President, Manuel Zelaya. I denounced this new conspiracy in the streets, in massive rallies of the people held on 14 and 15 September, the day of our national independence. I am threatened because I have pushed for structural changes to the economic model and denounced the unjust tax regime that perpetuates inequalities, feeds the powerful and exploits the poor.
Our sovereignty is the foundation and unwavering principle of our international relations, but colonial practices, interference and economic, media and political domination continue to be imposed in Honduras. The supranational Powers and certain multinational companies are the product of corrupt, public-private elites who have no other goal than to increase their capital. Globalization has failed in its mission to bring prosperity to the people. Its results show that wealth is concentrated among the richest countries and the elites, while the working class is left behind and forced to migrate in order to survive.
Before the General Assembly, the majority of Latin American and Caribbean leaders have denounced global capitalism as the main destroyer of natural resources and the enemy of decent living conditions for humankind. The accumulation of economic profits prevails over human interests, and the role of international financial organizations, with their conditional loans and fiscal and financial prescriptions, only aggravates the situation of poverty and dependence of our nations.
Neoliberal privatization policies continue to restrict people’s access to water and energy services, health, education, work and social security. Free trade agreements, imposed on our peoples, infringe on sovereignty and make it impossible for our producers to compete on a level playing field, causing the cost of living to rise every day.
Peace, justice, freedom and democracy continue to be the founding values of our nation. Therefore, we cannot allow them to be hijacked by the 10 most powerful families in Honduras, who have appropriated our main economic resources and refuse to accept the changes that I am promoting. We must strengthen our democratic system through popular consultations and the real, direct participation of our people.
The international model cities project, the zones for employment and economic development, which sold our territory piecemeal as booty for multinational capital, approved by traitors in the previous narco-regime, has been definitively cancelled by my Government of democratic socialism. Today I acknowledge the historic ruling of the Supreme Court of Justice and the support of the National Congress. I denounce the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes because it is a system of unfair arbitration in which private interests prevail over the interests of nation States.
In the past two years and eight months, I approved a structural reform to rebuild a single State treasury, cancelling a corruption scheme built around trusts through which the State’s resources were plundered. Thanks to the dismantling of that corrupt scheme, I am serving children in all the schools of Honduras, who now receive a daily school lunch and free tuition, and I am taking projects to communities living in extreme poverty.
We increased the production of basic grains in the first and second harvests, through more than 1.5 million technology vouchers delivered to producers who now receive free seeds and fertilizers. In addition, we promote housing and agricultural loans at the lowest interest rates in the history of Honduras, in addition to setting up rural community banks.
We are rescuing the National Electricity Company, the Honduran Institute of Agricultural Marketing and the National Commodity Supplier, which were privatized and abandoned during the 12 years and seven months of the narco-dictatorship. Today we benefit more than 800,000 families, who receive free energy, and we subsidize fuel prices to benefit all Honduran consumers with the lowest prices in Central America. The price of a gallon of fuel has dropped by 10 lempiras.
Investment in infrastructure is at its highest level in in the history of our country. We have rescued the public sector, with the historic approval of the construction of eight hospitals; the repair of thousands of schools and three national airports, the construction of highways, productive roads, bridges, intermunicipal paving and multi-sport courts for the entire country; and the restoration of the two national stadiums. And I must not neglect to mention the largest and most ambitious project in the history of Honduras, which is the plan to build the interoceanic railroad between Puerto Castilla on the Atlantic Ocean and the Port of Amapala on the Pacific Ocean.
In the past two years and eight months, we have reduced poverty by 12 percentage points. With the Solution Against Crime programme, endorsed by the Secretariat of Security with the cooperation of the armed forces, there has been a historic 15-point decrease in homicides, the largest such reduction in 20 years. My Zero Deforestation by 2030 programme has achieved historic results in the conservation of protected areas, forests and rivers in Honduras. Public funds in the Government’s single treasury account are used in an honest and patriotic manner, for the benefit of the Honduran people.
I want to raise my voice to decry the murder of Honduran social and political leader Juan López, who consistently denounced the extractive exploitation model. I repudiate and condemn the vile murder, and I have ordered that the full capacity of law enforcement and the institutions of the justice system be brought to bear to investigate, identify, capture and convict the intellectual and material authors of that crime. My sympathy goes out to his family, his colleagues and his friends.
I am the President pro tempore of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC). We are 33 States. As President of Honduras, my first act as President of Honduras was to speak up to denounce the genocide against the Palestinian people. More than 40,000 innocent people have already been killed by a bombing that some countries have rewarded with their silence. I raise my voice from this rostrum as well to demand the end of that genocide.
Lebanon must not become another Gaza Strip. We demand an immediate ceasefire in Lebanon.
The Haitian people demand our cooperation and solidarity as an organization of Latin American and Caribbean countries. Haiti is the first nation to be liberated from colonialism. It deserves our full attention, and in the coming days, I will convene the Presidents of CELAC member countries to demonstrate our commitment.
For 30 years, the General Assembly has overwhelmingly rejected the inhumane embargo against the Cuban people. That infamous blockade began in 1960. Since 1992, the General Assembly has adopted more than 30 resolutions calling on the United States to put an end to that cruel blockade. I demand an end to the unjust blockade against the brotherly peoples of Nicaragua and Venezuela, and we demand that Cuba be removed from the list of terrorist countries.
Yesterday I submitted to Secretary-General António Guterres the agreement formalizing the support of the United Nations in the fight against corruption and impunity. I thank the General Assembly, which adopted our request to establish that mechanism against public and private corruption (see resolution 78/258). As our martyr, Berta Cáceres, a valiant woman and defender of our natural resources and our indigenous peoples, said: “Wake up, humankind!” We still have time. May that be the call of our generation.
