Unfortunately, I have to start by saying that we are living in the age of dangers. Thirty-four years ago, when we got rid of our Communist oppressors and shifted from a one-party dictatorship to parliamentary democracy and from a planned communist economy to market economy; or 25 years ago, when we joined NATO; or 21 years ago, when we joined the European Union, we would not have thought that we would be faced once again with the phantom of Cold War. Similarly, a couple years ago, we would not have thought that war would return to Europe. Nowadays, that is the reality. We are faced with the phantom of the Cold War and war has returned to Europe.
I represent Hungary, country that is a neighbour to Ukraine. That means that for the past two and a half years, we have been living in the shadow of war. For two and a half years, almost 1,000 days, we have been confronted with the consequences — 1.3 million refugees. Even now, there are several hundred schools and kindergartens in Hungary that enrol the children of refugee families. We have been paying the price of a war which is not our war and for the outbreak of which we do not wear any kind of responsibility.
I therefore believe that, after almost 1,000 days, the real question is not what we think about the war. The real question is how peace can be made. Even more precisely, the question is: What is the fastest way to peace? We have to pick that option, the fastest, because the later peace is reached, the more people will die, the more destruction will take place and the more families will be torn apart. Start. We Hungarians do not want more destruction. We do not want more families to be torn apart. We do not want to see more videos about violent conscription. We do not want more people to die, especially considering the 150,000 Hungarians living in Ukraine. Members of that community have been mobilized into the Ukrainian army. Many of them have been deployed to the front line and, unfortunately, many of them have died already.
I think that, after almost 1,000 days, it is high time to do an honest stock-taking and to analyse what has worked out and what has not worked out in the international community’s or Europe’s reaction to the war. If we are honest with ourselves, we have to say that practically nothing has worked out in what the international community and Europe have done in reaction to the war. Nothing has worked out that was based on the assumption that there might be a solution on the battlefield.
We have to raise the question honestly as to whether the delivery of weapons has made any sense, and obviously it has made no sense, because weapons deliveries have not changed the situation on the battlefield and have not brought us closer to peace either. Weapons deliveries have only increased the volume of weapons on both sides of the front line, causing more casualties and the prolongation of the war. I hope that those who are still thinking about delivering more weapons to Ukraine will consider that impact and that consequence as well. Similarly, I hope that those who are supposed to make decisions about whether the weapons delivered from the West will be allowed to be used in strategic depth in Russia will take the responsible decision, because if Western weapons are allowed to be targeted in strategic depth in Russia that would cause a serious risk of escalation for sure. I do believe that, in the case of such a crisis situation, we really have to consider the weight and significance of words, because in such a situation words have a much more serious significance than they do in peacetime. We are seriously concerned in Hungary about the open and shameless references to the possible use of nuclear weapons.
Basically nothing has come of those measures that have been based on the assumption that there might be a battlefield solution. That means that a solution must be looked for somewhere else. If we raise the question of where we should look for that solution, then the answer is around the negotiating table. Therefore, Hungary argues in favour of an immediate ceasefire and the start of peace talks. That would be the fastest way to peace. With the start of peace talks, many lives will be saved.
I know that this is easy to say but very complicated to implement. Why? Because the international liberal mainstream has made peace a curse word and whoever argues in favour of peace is immediately attacked and stigmatized. It is also a huge mistake that diplomacy is now being given a diverted definition. Many would like us to believe that diplomacy is only about talking to those with whom we agree 100 per cent. That is not diplomacy. It is something else. It is not an achievement. Diplomacy is the capacity to talk to those with whom we may not agree — to talk to those with whom we may disagree on everything.
In that context, I believe that the United Nations should play a great role, because the United Nations was not established as a group of like-minded countries. It was established to give a platform for everyone to talk to everyone about everything. The United Nations gives a legitimate possibility, even to those countries that are at war with each other, to talk to each other. Therefore, we reject any kind of federalistic effort that would limit or restrict us in whom we can talk to in the framework of the United Nations and on what topic.
I represent a small or mid-size — it depends on one’s level of self-confidence — landlocked country of central Europe, and I have to say that we consider it nonsense and unacceptable that the representatives of the big Powers are not ready to talk to each other, because the fact that they do not talk to each other poses a serious security threat to us. There is another threat in their refusal to talk to each other. If they do not talk to each other, then the world can easily be divided into blocs again, and that is a nightmare for us. Why? Because we have already experienced it once. We lost 40 years of our lives, four decades when the world was divided into blocs. Therefore we have to speak very clearly. We do not want such a period to return. We do not want the world to be divided into blocs again.
I would like to disillusion everybody. It would not only be us who lose everything or almost everything if the world were divided into blocs. Everybody would lose on that. I do believe that a civilized East-West cooperation could bring a lot of profit to the whole world. Therefore, we Hungarians argue in favour of connectivity. We hope the next period, the next part of global history, will be not about a new Cold War but about connectivity, and although we are a relatively small country, we can serve as a good example of what great growth potential is represented by a civilized East-West cooperation.
We have been carrying out a pragmatic, patriotic foreign policy based on common sense and aimed at meeting the national interest. As an outcome of that, Hungary has become a meeting point of East and West. The biggest corporations in the Eastern and Western economies are meeting in Hungary. In Hungary, the top German premium carmakers and the top Chinese electric battery manufacturers are not only working together in one country and in one city; they are building their factories next to each other, on neighbouring plots. Therefore, I have to underline that the strategies of those corporations that have a determining impact on continental economies cannot be successful without free global economic cooperation.
It was not long ago that the former Chancellor of Germany spoke of an economic and trade cooperation zone starting in Lisbon and ending in Vladivostok, and it was not long ago that European political leaders spoke of Eurasian cooperation. Unfortunately, nowadays we are far from that. But it is not impossible to return there, on one very important precondition. Global politics must change fundamentally. What would that mean? It means, in our reading, that global politics must return to the bases of mutual respect and that dialogue and diplomacy must return as the major tools in that regard. That is absolutely not hopeless, because our experience here in the General Assembly in New York proves that the friends of peace are in the majority in the Hall. We Hungarians are proud to be part of that global majority for peace. We are ready to support all global initiatives aimed at reaching peace and to discuss all peace plans, and we consider it unacceptable that some countries would like to give exclusivity to one peace plan or another, acting as if the other one does not exist. We absolutely want all peace plans to be discussed, and here I would like to commend the People’s Republic of China and Brazil for putting together a plan and to express the hope that that plan will be on the agenda as well.
If we could reach peace, it would not only save people’s lives but would give big support and help to many countries in the transatlantic community, where I come from, to get rid of the huge burden of hypocrisy. I will explain why that is so. Many Western colleagues of ours like to say that they gave up their energy sources from Russia, for example. That is one of the biggest items of fake news ever because the Western countries have continued to do business with Russia just like everyone else. They just simply deny it. If we look at the share of Russian gas in the liquid natural gas ports in the Western part of Europe, we might be surprised. Or if we take a look at where the oil arriving in Western European countries comes from originally, we might be surprised. And if we look at who is the number one uranium supplier of this very country, the United States, we would be surprised as well. In order to spare representatives the homework of looking for the answer, it is the Russian Federation.
All this proves that economic sanctions are totally useless in that regard. They absolutely do not work. They do much more harm to some European economies than to the Russian economy. Many Western countries and Western economies evade the sanctions, so I think it is no wonder that we cannot recall any successful sanction mechanism in history. These sanctions do not make any sense either.
The war in Ukraine imposes a serious security risk on Europe, but it is not the only security risk there. We in Europe have been faced with massive waves of illegal migration. Unfortunately, Brussels made a huge mistake here. It wanted to manage migration instead of stopping it, and that approach has encouraged a massive number of people to hit the road, pay thousands of euros to smugglers and take the life-threatening journey to Europe. But we Hungarians stick to our own right to take the decision on our own about who we allow to enter the territory of our country and who we are ready to live together with.
I think that the United Nations is the best place to recall international law. International law speaks very clearly. Everyone who has to escape from his or her home has the right to stay temporarily in the territory of the first safe country, but not in the second, the third or the fourth. Therefore, Hungary will continue to stop the flow of illegal migration on its border through which we are basically saving Europe from further huge security-related challenges. In the meantime, it is insane that while Hungary is protecting its border, it has to pay a fine of tens of millions of euros because it complies with international law.
I would summarize the situation as follows. In the past 10 years, Hungary has carried out a pragmatic, patriotic foreign policy strategy aimed at ensuring the national interest and guaranteeing the security of our own citizens. We will continue to do so, just as we will continue to always be honest and open and to always do what we say and say what we think. That may be unusual nowadays, but it is possible because there is unusual political stability in Hungary, which is very unique in Europe. We, the one-party right-wing Government, have won every election over the past 18 years. That means that people like what we are doing, they support what we are doing and they give their approval for us to continue. And the Government will do so. We have no intention of satisfying non-governmental organizations or external actors, but we will always have the intention of satisfying our own electorate, our own citizens, because we believe that democracy is all about that — the people.
