This is my last opportunity, as Foreign Minister of Indonesia, to represent my country before the General Assembly.
It has been a decade of so many challenges but, at the same time, a decade of Indonesia’s many contributions to addressing global issues. One of them is Palestine. Indonesia cannot — I repeat, cannot — sit back and relax seeing the injustice that continues to be committed against the people of Palestine. Indonesia stands and will always stand with the people of Palestine to attain their right to have an independent State of Palestine.
As I speak, more than 41,000 people in Gaza have been killed and the situations in the West Bank and Lebanon are deteriorating. Is that not enough? Will the Security Council take action to stop Israel’s atrocities only when all Palestinians have been displaced, or when 100,000 have been Palestinians have been killed, or when a regional armed conflict breaks out? That will be too late. Prime Minister Netanyahu said yesterday that, “Israel seeks peace. Israel yearns for peace” ( A/79/PV.13, P.8). Really? How are we supposed to believe that statement? Yesterday, while he was here, Israel conducted unprecedented massive air attacks on Beirut. Prime Minister Netanyahu wants the war to continue. We must stop that. I repeat — we must stop that. We must pressure Israel to come back to the political solution of two States.
The overwhelming majority of United Nations Members strongly support the two-State solution. This is the right time to walk the walk. Recognizing the State of Palestine is the least that we can do now to give Palestine equal footing on the world’s stage and to exert pressure on Israel to stop its atrocities. Therefore, I urge countries that have yet to recognize the State of Palestine to do so now. If each and every one of us does so, for sure it will have an impact. The recognition of Palestine today is an investment that would yield a more peaceful, just and humane world tomorrow.
Once again, Indonesia urges the permanent members of the Security Council to act concretely to immediately stop Israel from blatantly violating international law and to end Israeli impunity. The mandate of the Security Council is to maintain peace and create peace, not to maintain and prolong wars, or even worse to support the perpetrator of atrocities. Inaction means complicity.
Wherever Indonesia goes, we carry the voices of the global South. Indonesia assumed that commitment in 1955 when it hosted the Asia-Africa Conference in Bandung. The Bandung spirit of equality, cooperation and solidarity will always be alive to inspire the global South to gain its rights, including its right to development. That is the spirit that we need if we want to have a global leadership in which moral virtues are the compass of our business. We must not bury the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law under the rubble of double standards, the trust deficit and the zero-sum game.
Against those global challenges, Indonesia continues to be part of the solution. By embodying that commitment, Indonesia’s presidency in 2022 managed to prevent the Group of 20 (G-20) from collapsing, despite deep geopolitical divisions. During the global pandemic, we led the establishment of the Pandemic Fund and co-chaired the Gavi COVAX Advance Market Commitment Engagement Group to ensure equitable access to vaccines and financial resource and safeguard health security for all, especially in the global South.
As a member of the Human Rights Council, Indonesia continuously calls for inclusive partnerships in addressing global human rights issues. Amidst regional rivalries, Indonesia pioneered the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Outlook on the Indo-Pacific as a framework for concrete and inclusive cooperation — to embrace, not to contain. We have demonstrated that global leadership will never be attained through force, domination and fear. Global leadership should be about guiding collective actions by listening, empowering collaboration and instilling hope. This is what I say: “Leadership without hegemony”. To attain that vision, we must focus on three key priorities.
First, we must advance peace through inclusive leadership. The multilateral system should be reformed. The Security Council must be an inclusive space for peace where a wider range of voices can be heard and timely decisions can be taken for our collective good. Without peace, our efforts to attain global goals such as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will remain a dream without reality. Indonesia is committed to contributing to global peace by being one of the largest contributors of troops to United Nations peacekeeping missions and remaining firm in our proactive role in countering terrorism. We also strive to ensure that the peace we are promoting will be inclusive by advancing the women and peace and security agenda and by contributing to women’s empowerment, including by pursuing equal access to education for women and girls in Afghanistan. Investing in women is investing in peace. Empowering women is empowering prosperity for all.
Secondly, we must ensure a resilient future for shared prosperity. Indonesia believes in a future where all nations thrive, no matter how big or small, but the global pandemic and the impacts of climate change have shown us all that to prosper together we must work together. Therefore, the implementation of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) is important to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs and scale up partnership and sustainable development even beyond 2030.
At the same time, geopolitical tensions have also significantly impacted global supply chains, affecting the development trajectory of the countries of the global South, many of which remain unable to freely exercise their right to development. In that context, Indonesia has taken proactive steps. Earlier this month, Indonesia held the second Indonesia-Africa Forum to enhance cooperation in international supply chains and connectivity and build collaboration in preparing for future challenges. Indonesia also hosted the tenth World Water Forum this year. We believe that water is a crucial element for shared prosperity.
Thirdly, we must build bridges to foster global collaboration. A winner-takes-all and take-it-or-leave-it mentality should no longer exist when collaboration is the only antidote in addressing the global challenges of today. For Indonesia, a world where the only option is us versus them will result only in a world of us or them. Global solidarity and collective responsibility are the essence of the Bandung spirit. That spirit guided us through our G-20 presidency in 2022, the chairmanship of ASEAN in 2023 and our continuous efforts to voice the aspirations of the global South. Indonesia envisions a world where nations collaborate together to address shared challenges, uphold international law and protect the human rights and dignity of all people.
In South-East Asia, ASEAN, with its 650 million people, has proven that diversity can coexist with stability, peace and prosperity. Indonesia also continues to work with ASEAN to restore peace and stability in Myanmar through the implementation of the ASEAN five-point of consensus and to enable the safe and dignified return of the Rohingya people. Beyond ASEAN, we also continue to deepen our engagement in the Pacific region to become part and parcel of an inclusive and peaceful Indo-Pacific architecture, based on the principles of solidarity, equality and mutual respect.
Peace, justice and humanity will always be at the core of Indonesia’s foreign policy. Indonesia understands that global leadership is not something that is inherited and that it does not fall from the sky. It must be earned through our collective efforts. Members may rest assured that Indonesia’s commitment to common peace, common prosperity and common security will be carried forward across Indonesia’s successive administrations. It is in that spirit that I am proud to announce Indonesia’s candidature for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the 2029-2030 term. Our candidature reflects our deep commitment to contributing to global peace and security. Let us work together to build a legacy of peace for future generations.
