I extend my sincere congratulations both to the General Assembly on the opening of its general debate at its seventy-ninth session and to the President of the Assembly on his well-deserved election to that post. I trust that the crucial themes of this session — peace, sustainable development and human dignity — will illuminate a bright path for both present and future generations.
Last year, the devoted late president of my country, Mr. Seyyed Ebrahim Raisi, addressed the General Assembly from this very rostrum (see A/78/PV.5). He was martyred in the service of the Iranian people. May his soul rest in peace.
This is my first time addressing the Assembly as the president of the Islamic Republic of Iran, a position I assumed after the Iranian people voted in favour of my central campaign platform of national empathy. This guiding principle is rooted in the command of Almighty God, as set forth in the Holy Qur’an.
According to the teachings of the Qur’an, humankind had once been a single community, to whom Allah sent prophets as heralds and as warners to reveal truth through Scripture to help judge the disputes among people. No one disputed the Scriptures except the very people who received them — out of jealousy — despite the clear proofs they had received.
Imam Ali instructed one of his governors to embrace people with all his heart, show them kindness, extend his compassion towards them, and refuse to treat those under his command with harshness or violence. For people fall into two categories: they are either one’s brothers in religion or equals in creation.
The mission of all prophets has been to establish and promote truth and justice in society among all peoples, regardless of colour, race, gender or language. Peace and security in the world will not be achieved unless the rights of all individuals, communities and nations are upheld with justice and fairness.
Let us ask ourselves, are the roots of war and bloodshed we see in today’s world anything other than the fact that aggressors have violated the rights of others, overlooked the rights of nations, enforced discrimination and inequality, kept certain groups weak and underdeveloped, and disregarded the rights of individuals? As long as injustice, oppression, greed, poverty and ignorance prevail in any region, violence and conflict will continue. Unless we confront the root causes of such disorders, we cannot rescue the future of our children from darkness and destruction.
I embarked on my electoral campaign with a platform focused on reform, national empathy, constructive engagement with the world, and economic development. I was honoured to gain the trust of my fellow citizens at the ballot box. I aim to lay a strong foundation for my country’s entry into a new era, positioning it to play an effective and constructive role in the evolving global order. My objective is to address existing obstacles and challenges while structuring my country’s foreign relations, in cognizance of the necessities and realities of the contemporary world.
Over the past year, the world has witnessed the true nature of the Israeli regime. It has witnessed how the regime carries out atrocities in Gaza. In 11 months, it has murdered in cold blood over 41,000 innocent people, mostly women and children. Its leaders label this genocide — the killing of children, war crimes and State terrorism — as legitimate self-defence. They call hospitals, kindergartens and schools as legitimate military targets. They consider the freedom-loving and brave people around the world who protest against their genocide to be anti-Semitic. They designate and oppress people who have stood up against seven decades of occupation and humiliation as terrorists. Israel has assassinated Iranian scientists, diplomats and even guests on our soil, and it has supported both overtly and covertly such terrorist groups as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
In contrast, Iran has supported popular liberation movements of people that have been victims of four generations of the crimes and colonialism of the Israeli regime. We have been siding with the people across the world who have flooded the streets in outrage against Israeli atrocities. We condemn Israeli crimes against humanity.
It is imperative that the international community immediately stop the violence and bring about a permanent ceasefire in Gaza and end the desperate barbarism of Israel in Lebanon before it engulfs the region and the world. Israel has been defeated in Gaza, and no amount of barbaric violence can restore its myth of invincibility.
Naturally, blind Israeli State terrorism over the past few days in Lebanon, followed by a massive aggression causing thousands of victims, cannot go unanswered. The responsibility for all consequences will be borne by those governments that have thwarted all global efforts to end this horrific catastrophe and have the audacity to call themselves champions of human rights.
The only path to end the 70-year-old nightmare in West Asia and the world is to restore the right of all Palestinians to self-determination. We propose that all people of Palestine, both those who live in their motherland and those who have been forced into its diaspora, determine their future in a referendum. We are confident that through such a mechanism we can achieve a lasting peace with Muslims, Christians and Jews living side by side with one another in one land, in tranquillity and peace and away from racism and apartheid.
When we examine the contemporary history of the region, we see that Iran has never initiated a war. It has only heroically defended itself against external aggression, causing the aggressors to regret their actions. Iran has never occupied the territory of any nation, nor has it sought the resources of any country. It has repeatedly offered various proposals to its neighbours and in international forums aimed at establishing lasting peace and stability.
We have emphasized the importance of unity in the region and of establishing a strong region that rests on several fundamental principles. First, we must recognize that we are neighbours who, because of this bond, will always remain together. The presence of foreign Powers in our region has always been temporary and led to instability. Our development and progress are interconnected, and outsourcing security to extraregional Powers will not benefit any of us.
Secondly, the new regional order must be inclusive and beneficial for all neighbours. An order that fails to safeguard the interests of each neighbouring country cannot be sustained.
Thirdly, neighbouring and brotherly countries should not waste their valuable resources on attritional rivalries and arms races. Our region suffers from war, sectarian tensions, terrorism and extremism, drug trafficking, water scarcity, refugee crises, environmental degradation and foreign intervention. The way to address these shared challenges — in order to ensure a better future for coming generations — is through collective effort.
I am the president of a country that throughout modern history has endured threats, war, occupation and sanctions. Others have neither come to our assistance nor respected our declared neutrality. Global Powers have even sided with aggressors against us. We have learned that we can only rely on our own people and our own native capabilities.
The Islamic Republic of Iran seeks to safeguard its own security, not to create insecurity for others. We want peace for all and seek no war or quarrel with anyone.
We seek lasting peace and security for the peoples of Ukraine and Russia. The Islamic Republic of Iran opposes war and emphasizes the urgent need to end military hostilities in Ukraine. We support all peaceful solutions and believe that dialogue is the only way to resolve this crisis.
In the current globalized world, the security and interests of a country cannot be attained by undermining the security and interests of others. We need a new paradigm to address global challenges. Such a paradigm must focus on opportunities instead of being obsessed with perceived threats. Such an approach, based on engagement, can provide us with fresh opportunities for cooperation.
Iran and global Powers achieved a historic nuclear deal in 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), through that fresh outlook, based on shared opportunities. Iran agreed to an unprecedented level of nuclear oversight — the highest ever — in return for recognition of our rights and the lifting of sanctions within the JCPOA framework. Trump’s unilateral withdrawal from that agreement manifested a political approach laced with threats and an economic strategy driven by coercion.
Unilateral sanctions target innocent people and seek to undermine the foundations of the Iranian economy. The goal is to “securitize” Iran, which, experience shows, leads to insecurity for all. The so-called maximum-pressure policy of the United States was in fact implemented against the Iranian people when Iran was fulfilling all its obligations under the JCPOA, as was repeatedly verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
We are ready to engage with JCPOA participants, if JCPOA commitments are implemented fully and in good faith. Dialogue on other issues can follow. In this context, I want to address the American people: It is not Iran that has established military bases along United States borders. It is not Iran that has imposed sanctions on the United States and obstructed its trade relations with the world. It is not Iran that prevents Americans from gaining access to medicine. It is not Iran that has restricted access to the global banking and financial system. We have not targeted United States military leaders; rather, it is the United States that assassinated Iran’s most revered military commander at the Baghdad airport.
My message to all States pursuing a counterproductive strategy towards Iran is to learn from history. We have the opportunity to transcend these limitations and enter a new era. This era will commence with the acknowledgment of Iran’s security concerns and with cooperation on mutual challenges.
Sanctions are destructive and inhumane weapons designed to cripple a nation’s economy. Preventing access to essential medications is one of the most painful consequences of sanctions, endangering the lives of thousands of innocent people. Not only are such measures a blatant violation of human rights, but they also constitute a crime against humanity.
Our nation has demonstrated resilience in the face of numerous hardships caused by sanctions over the past few years. Although the wounds inflicted by these sanctions are deep within our society, confronting this bitter experience has transformed us into a stronger nation with unwavering resolve and self-confidence.
In order to build a better world in future, Iran stands prepared to foster meaningful economic, social, political and security partnerships with global Powers and its neighbours based on equal footing with them. The appropriate response to this message from Iran is not to impose more sanctions, but to fulfil existing obligations to remove sanctions, for the benefit of the Iranian people, thereby laying the foundations for more constructive agreements. I hope that this message from Iran today is receives the close attention it deserves.
