The seventy-ninth session of the United Nations General Assembly is taking place amid dangerous circumstances in the Middle East and the world, in which the global international order faces a difficult test, one which threatens its existence and renders it incapable of achieving the goals for which it was founded. Those goals include the maintenance of international security and stability and human rights.
Today we are witnessing events in which all international agreements and norms are being violated. The international institutions that are supposed to work towards managing and organizing international relations in a way that enhances peace and stability and steers human relations away from violence and brutality are being undermined. Important principles such as sovereignty, territorial integrity, multilateral cooperation, the laws of war, humanitarian law, international humanitarian law, the responsibility to protect and the right to self-determination are all being ignored.
The world is being pushed towards full-scale confrontations and conflicts while the Security Council is powerless and without a role. As it fails in its responsibility, alternative mechanisms may be resorted to, but ignoring such institutions threatens to lead international relations into chaos.
At the same time, we must not forget to commend the courageous stances taken by some of the leaders of those who head those United Nations institutions, including the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres. However, we clearly see that there has been no effective impact, their significant efforts notwithstanding.
Putting an end to the violations in Palestine and the region is the responsibility of all, chiefly that of the Security Council, which has failed to achieve one of its most important objectives, namely the maintenance of international peace and security. In occupied Palestine today, we are confronted with a people who are under attack by an occupying military force that is displacing millions unchecked and killing thousands, and whose senior officials speak openly of exterminating that people through mass starvation and using nuclear weapons to eliminate them, with no deterrent measures being taken. Moreover, neither the international community nor any of its members has committed to upholding the responsibility under international law to protect that people.
The Palestinian people have been denied the right to live in dignity in a State like all other peoples, against a backdrop of shameful global impotence. Meanwhile, the criminals — by virtue of the support they receive, their impunity repeatedly ensured — are being enabled to prolong, entrench and expand the conflict and to carry out attacks against others. We have witnessed further disregard in the series of attacks on countries in the region, the occupation and annexation of territories and the alteration of international borders — all in contravention of Security Council resolutions — reducing international law and Security Council resolutions to little more than ink on paper. Those are dangerous precedents that threaten the entire international system and strike at the pillars of international institutions, with dire consequences for humankind as a whole.
Persisting in its extremism, the occupation cites Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) as a pretext for aggression against Lebanon, selectively choosing that resolution and some of its articles, while ignoring the numerous resolutions adopted and indisputable principles of international law endorsed by the Security Council, including Council resolutions 242 (1967), 248 (1968), 252 (1968), 265 (1969) and 279 (1970). We are witnessing a brutal campaign of indiscriminate killing and the use of technology to carry out remote bombings, without regard for defenceless civilians, in a dangerous precedent that indicates the extent of the involvement of the occupation Government and its spree of crimes against humanity.
Today the Government and the people of Iraq, under the guidance of the supreme religious authority, stand with Lebanon and its brotherly people as they confront a new chapter of premeditated brutal aggression that seeks to plunge the region into conflicts — something that we have already cautioned against. We will continue to provide all possible assistance to overcome the effects of those attacks. Our position is based on a history of interdependence and a well-known Iraqi steadfastness that rejects aggression and occupation, opposes depriving peoples of their right to their land, heritage and holy sites and repeatedly condemns any international support or justification for the aggressor’s premises.
We also note the ongoing and systematic targeting of international agencies and relief organizations in the occupied territories and the brazen harm done to their personnel in Gaza, including such United Nations agencies as the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is supposed to be protected under international law. I would like to recall that those actions not only disrupt humanitarian work, but they also violate international standards that protect civilians and aid workers in conflict zones. Those most recent actions by the occupation aim to threaten the stability of the countries in the region by igniting a large-scale regional war. As a founding Member of the United Nations, Iraq hopes that the institution will achieve the goals for which it was established — maintaining peace and security and sparing the world the dangers of the wars and tragedies that it has experienced throughout history. Allow us to express our disappointment at the failure of the Security Council and the international system to fulfil their duties.
We observe a significant increase in hate crimes and intolerance, affecting our security and stability. We are in urgent need of international cooperation to spread the spirit of tolerance and mutual respect and to combat hate speech, discrimination and violence, which are steadily increasing around the world. We observe that one of the prominent manifestations of hate speech is the growing phenomenon of Islamophobia, which undermines global efforts to achieve peace, security and coexistence and sets the stage for attacks on our social and moral values, which are part of our human existence. Therefore, I call on the United Nations to redouble its efforts to promote dialogue and understanding between different cultures and religions, and I stress the need to promote unity and harmony in the face of increasing polarization, while stressing the need for Heads of State and leaders of international institutions to stand against religious intolerance and hatred.
In Iraq, in contrast to the foregoing, there are positive developments of note. The country that had one third of its territory occupied by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and that many observers had believed to be finished — heralding the end of Iraq as we know it — is today, 10 years on, witnessing the implementation of a comprehensive reconstruction and development plan, the restoration of life to its cities and the construction of high-rise buildings and infrastructure, and safety prevails.
We still have many fundamental challenges ahead of us in achieving economic, administrative and environmental reforms and diversifying the economy. We have made great strides in achieving security and have triumphed over terrorism, and we will soon crown that victory over that terrorist organization with an important joint declaration with our allies and friends who stood with Iraq and supported it against a brutal foe that posed a danger to the entire world.
We are focusing our efforts on strengthening the democratic process in Iraq and working to consolidate the social contract and national cohesion, in line with what our people chose in their permanent Constitution of 2005. We organized provincial council elections, which had been stalled for a decade. In addition, following the disruption of elections in Kirkuk in 2005, we are now organizing parliamentary elections for the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. We will continue working to strengthen the federal Government’s relationship with the regional government and the local governments in the governorates, in accordance with the Constitution and the law, and to protect the existence of minorities and fraternal communities and ensure their needs are met, as promoting justice and preserving our country’s diversity — one of its most valuable assets — are among our priorities.
The priorities of this Government are fivefold: creating jobs, improving services, fighting poverty, combating corruption and carrying out economic reforms. The Iraqi Government is endeavouring to rehabilitate the necessary human resources and has made great strides in building State institutions and enforcing the rule of law. It also seeks to activate the role of the private sector, address administrative bloat, diversify sources of income, reform the banking and financial sector, manage the energy transition and address the causes of social and economic unrest and, consequently, of political unrest. That transformation is complicated for Iraq, owing to the economic structural challenge represented by relying on the public sector to absorb the workforce and consuming oil revenues to pay the salaries of millions of employees. The dual challenge facing Iraq is excessive dependence on oil revenues and limiting its ability to diversify the economy. That has come as a result of decades of wars and economic blockade and the dictatorial regime’s absurd economic policies and subsequently some aspects of miscalculation and management and the waste of human and material resources that could have been developed. Governance, anti-corruption, digital transformation and e-government are among our top priorities, as they are the most important strategies to reduce corruption and achieve good governance, but we expect the international community to support our efforts to recover the looted funds that are Iraq’s right and to end the legal and legislative obstacles put in place by some countries in order to provide a safe haven for corruption-related funds, such as banking secrecy and preventing the disclosure of beneficial owners to help to evade accountability.
Iraq seeks to achieve regional security and stability by finding ways for constructive partnerships to address common challenges through cooperation among the participating parties and increasing mutual interdependence in a way that is in the interests of all. We plan to launch initiatives in the region that reflect economic integration and regional stability, in particular the Development Road project, which aims to transform Iraq into a major regional hub for trade and transportation and link the Middle East with Europe through Iraq, using a network of railways, highways and industrial cities, linking the large port of Al-Faw in southern Iraq to Europe via the countries in the region. That project represents the most important step to enhance regional cooperation and integration and is in line with Iraq’s broader goals of rebuilding the economy and improving services.
Iraq faces serious environmental challenges as a result of climate change and desertification — challenges that cannot be addressed without enhanced international cooperation, as desertification and the lack of vegetation cover lead to the displacement of millions in search of stability, which exacerbates social and political crises. We call for international solidarity to face environmental challenges and to work to raise awareness of the importance of sustainable water resources management, which is a central issue for Iraq. That challenge requires commitment to the principle of shared and just responsibility among States, as we face existential challenges related to an acute shortage of water resources, which threatens agriculture, negatively affects the economy and threatens the lives of millions of Iraqis. The Government therefore attaches top priority to those files and issues and works in cooperation with neighbouring countries to reach sustainable solutions and policies to deal with those influences.
Lastly, I would like to express my deep gratitude to the United Nations for the support it has provided to Iraq over the past two decades. We look forward to a new phase of cooperation with the United Nations in Iraq that will begin by the end of 2025, and we hope that that will mark the beginning of a new era full of stability and prosperity for our people and a new page of partnership with the United Nations. We are working hard to build a better future for our coming generations, and we look forward to continuing our partnership with the international community to achieve that. The selection of Iraq to chair the Group of 77 and China for 2025 is a victory for Iraqi diplomacy, which seeks to achieve development goals, bridge the technological gap between the countries of the North and the countries of the South and achieve integration and reform of the international economic system. As Chair of the largest international group of 134 nations, we look forward to working towards a more stable and just world in which all peoples of the world interact and have development opportunities.
In conclusion, our policy puts Iraq and its people, security, sovereignty and prosperity first, and we proceed with confidence to erase the traces of the past, including wars, dictatorship and terrorism, just as we continue to rebuild Iraq and to give it the regional and international status it well deserves.
