First, I would like to once again thank all those whose daily work is dedicated to the United Nations and its ideals.
All across the globe, people work in the name of the United Nations, wearing the colours and emblems of the United Nations, giving their efforts to make our world a better place and often doing work that only the United Nations is capable of doing. In these Headquarters and other United Nations offices, hundreds of people show up every day to ensure that the nations of the world can count on the Organization to be the forum where the biggest challenges facing humankind can be discussed, debated, and — I hope — set on a path of resolution.
Next year will mark the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations. The United Nations emerged out of calamity, holding the promise of a brighter future — a promise of the peaceful settlement of disputes, universal human rights and the opportunity for all to enjoy peace and prosperity. Despite setbacks, wrong turns and many bad decisions, these past 80 years have indeed been the most peaceful and prosperous that humankind has experienced.
For my own nation, 1944 also marked a new beginning, with Iceland becoming a republic. Iceland’s status as an independent nation has been defended not primarily by weapons or alliances but by a robust system of international law, mutually beneficial cooperation and strong and universally respected international institutions. For us, it is paramount to safeguard this multilateral system.
When the United Nations was founded, it was a time of change and a time that demanded decisions. It was also, it seems to me, a time of creativity in the face of destruction, a time of determination despite despair, and a time for hope to triumph over horror. By founding the United Nations, the leaders of the world’s nations set a path guided by a shared vision for a peaceful and prosperous world, faith in fundamental human rights and the equality of nations, large and small. But as Secretary-General António Guterres recently stated when speaking about the Summit of the Future, “we cannot build a future fit for our grandchildren with systems built for our grandparents” — or, in the case of a person my age, a system created for my great-grandparents to build a future fit for my own generation and my children.
These are also times of profound change. All around the world, technology is fundamentally changing how people experience reality and, to quote Mr. Guterres again, those technologies are being developed “in a moral and legal vacuum, without governance or guardrails”. That is no small thing, and it is not something that leaders and politicians can treat as trivial or unconnected to other policy issues.
While elected representatives and leaders debate how to address challenges that we face, and while we attempt to guide our societies towards a better future, there is an ongoing battle for people’s attention, convictions and beliefs being waged through increasingly addictive technologies, often self-guided by overwhelmingly powerful and completely unprincipled algorithms. That battle will not necessarily be won by those who share a belief in peace and prosperity or have faith in fundamental human rights and the equality of nations large and small.
As those staggering changes are taking place in our information environment, the world is facing the greatest number of armed conflicts since the Second World War and democratic institutions worldwide are facing a loss of trust. Those developments are not happening in a vacuum. In her address accepting the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo in 2021, Philippine journalist Maria Ressa pointed out that, “without facts, you cannot have truth. Without truth, you cannot have trust”. Ressa continued, “without trust, we have no shared reality, no democracy, and it becomes impossible to deal with our world’s existential problems.”
Sadly, to an ever more obvious extent, that prospect of a lack of shared reality has now become fact. Malign actors are actively undermining social order across the globe; they are spreading suspicion and fear and fuelling despair and rage. They may use technology, but their target is always the very essence of what we are as human beings. The individual rights that have proven vital to the functioning of democratic societies are being subverted. That is why I said in my address to this body one year ago that “human rights are for human beings” and that freedom of expression “is not for programmed bots that spread hate, lies and fear” ( A/78/PV.12, p. 49). That is a challenge that we have not yet solved.
Freedom cannot exist without accountability and, to paraphrase American historian Timothy Snyder, it must always involve some risk. We know that sacrificing individual rights because of those risks is an unacceptable proposition, akin to burning down the house to kill a spider. An individual, even one with questionable and dangerous opinions, has the right to be heard. In a true democracy, we accept the risks associated with the freedom of speech, but we must be careful not to let our freedom be hijacked by those who evade accountability and take no risk. The current danger does not come from free individuals who advocate for their own misguided, crazy or evil ideas, but from vast networks of paid and unpaid agents alike, made-up trolls hiding in the shadows, entirely unaccountable for their poisonous contribution to public discourse. That sort of speech is no more a manifestation of the freedom of expression than a forced gathering to salute a dictator is an example of freedom of assembly.
Those are issues that exemplify the urgent need for a strong multilateral system. However, that system cannot be left to provide answers to how to maintain itself. The real power lies with national Governments and leaders across the world. All of us who are entrusted with positions of authority and influence in our own societies must shoulder our responsibility to maintain and strengthen a multilateral system based on the Charter of the United Nations. For that, we need more interaction, more humanity and much more unscripted interactions at the highest levels.
Russia’s full-scale aggression against Ukraine, the Sudan’s civil war and the devastating conflicts in the Middle East all rage on while other longer-running conflicts grow protracted. One thing that they all have in common is that innocent civilians bear the highest cost. By invading Ukraine and violently seizing its territory, the Russian Federation has committed a flagrant breach of the United Nations Charter and derogated from its primary obligations as a permanent member of the Security Council to uphold international peace and security. The Russian Federation’s repeated threats of using nuclear weapons are reckless and dangerous.
In the case of the Russian Federation’s actions, there should be no doubt about who is in the right and who is in the wrong. It is Mr. Putin who has concocted a false narrative around his invasion of Ukraine’s territory. It is he who started that senseless war and it is in the Kremlin’s power to end it at any time by withdrawing its forces from all the territory that is internationally recognized as belonging to Ukraine. The Russian Federation’s disdain for the principles of the United Nations Charter is on full display in Ukraine, but it is also pervasive in many other parts of the world, with ongoing insidious efforts to subvert democratic norms and incite violence and chaos.
Israel’s right to exist is beyond debate. Iceland has condemned in the strongest terms the horrific attack on Israel on 7 October 2023. We continue to call for the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages. But no country is above the law, and the Palestinian people’s right to self-determination is also beyond debate. In the current conflict, the world has witnessed the limitations of sending humanitarian aid, water and power to Gaza. That is simply unacceptable. There have been reports of civilian infrastructure and hospitals being used for purposes that can deprive them of their protection under international humanitarian law. That is also unacceptable. We have also witnessed unacceptable losses of civilian lives — children, aid and health care workers, journalists and United Nations staff — and journalists are being denied access to the war zone and silenced.
Iceland condemns all violations of international law, including international humanitarian law. International law provides States with rights and obligations. Both are sacred. Again, we call on all parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire and to avoid any action that could lead to further escalation. A clear political path to peace must follow a ceasefire, entailing the establishment of two States living side-by-side in peace and security. With that aim, and as confirmed by the International Court of Justice, Israel must immediately cease all new settlement activities and bring its unlawful presence to an end.
Our worst fears of an escalation have now been realized with the bloodiest days that Lebanon has seen in years. And still, we must brace ourselves for even worse, with the conflict spiralling further out of control. The parties have been warned of the cost and the danger of that development. It must stop, for the sake of humanity.
In 10 days, the General Assembly will convene to elect 18 new members to the Human Rights Council for the term 2025-2027. Iceland is a candidate in those elections, hoping to serve for a second time on that important body. We have submitted our candidature out of a deep conviction that respect for human rights and the rule of law, justice and fairness are key to a prosperous society.
In his opening address to the Assembly on Tuesday, Secretary-General Guterres pointed out that fewer than 10 per cent of all speakers this week would be female (see A/79/PV.7). In our estimate, I am one of only 19 women speaking from this podium in the general debate. I thought we had come further than that, but of course I am truly one of the lucky ones. It is beyond my comprehension that there exist in this world, in these enlightened times, societies of human beings where little girls and women are not allowed to go to school, and that there exists in this world of ours a society where little girls are not allowed to laugh in public and women are not allowed to take part in conversations outside the confines of their homes. A teenage girl in Afghanistan who sings a happy song in public runs the risk of being arrested, of being humiliated, of being ostracized, of being beaten or even worse. How has the world come to this? That is why Iceland supports the cross-regional action announced this week here in New York to hold the Taliban to account for its grave violations of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
Those whose sexual orientation differs from the common norm are suffering backlash, too. While we have thankfully seen a significant shift towards the decriminalization of consensual same-sex relations, we are also witnessing laws adopted to establish or expand criminal sanctions contrary to the basic universal norms that all States have agreed. I do not understand why people should not be allowed the freedom to love and be loved for who they are. Increased individual freedom and happiness should never worry politicians or Governments that have real problems to solve. I am proud to confirm that if elected to the Human Rights Council, Iceland will include LGBTQI+ rights among list of priorities during our term on the Council.
Iceland strongly emphasizes global actions against climate change, for both mitigation and adaptation. Climate change is not a distant threat; it is a reality already impacting the lives and livelihoods of millions of people. Climate change threatens the health of the ocean, which Iceland is highly dependent on. A healthy ocean and a healthy planet are matters of economic prosperity and well-being.
One of the many meetings I attended this week was a high-level meeting on sea level rise, which strongly indicates that our ocean environment is destabilizing. That is yet another challenge we must address, and we believe that it is only through more determined climate change mitigation that we can limit the effects of sea level rise. Taking on that challenge, as well as ensuring that respect is shown for rules and regulations that we have agreed to abide by concerning our behaviour at sea, is of great importance to a nation like Iceland, which relies heavily on the ocean around us. The United Nations has a proven record in that arena, primarily with the Convention for the Law of the Sea, a particularly important agreement in our view and that of all maritime nations. Therefore, it is of great concern that the law of the sea is being challenged and undermined, including in the South China Sea. We call on all Member States to honour their commitments and act in accordance with the law of the sea.
We must work together for a more stable and prosperous world, and Iceland is set on contributing more to sustainable development. Our recently adopted policy for international development cooperation supports that with the overarching goals of poverty eradication, respect for human rights and improved living standards. It foresees a significant increase in official development assistance. Given our own experience, we will continue our firm focus on gender equality, women’s empowerment, sexual and reproductive health and rights, and eradicating gender-based violence. Crucially, we will increase our efforts to strengthen civil rights and improve social and legal protection for LGBTQI+ persons.
It falls on all of us to support the vital work of the United Nations and other partners in addressing the dire status of humanitarian affairs. The number of refugees and internally displaced persons has never been higher, as increasing levels of fragility know no geographical boundaries.
We are meeting at a time when the multilateral system is under the greatest pressure it has faced since the establishment of the United Nations. Meanwhile, it is abundantly clear that without multilateralism, without international cooperation and without respect for international law, the downward spiral of crises and conflict will only accelerate. The adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) offers an encouraging sign, a collective recognition that it is only together that we can work for a better world and that we need new tools in these times of change.
The choice is ours — either we take on the responsibility to guard the foundations of multilateralism, the United Nations Charter and international law, or we succumb to a world of might makes right, which surely will only lead us to disaster. The choice is clear. We must work together to protect and promote the fundamental principles and values underpinning the vision of the United Nations founders and on which this great Organization is built. We must ensure that the United Nations system, including the Security Council, keeps up with the times and reforms and adapts to changing realities. Taking that step will require courage and strong political will.
Over and beyond, we must recognize that the world needs the United Nations more than ever before and that we cannot and must not fail to make our Organization the best possible version of itself. The multilateral system deserves to be defended in the same spirit of creativity, under the same promise of hope and with the same steadfast determination that guided the hands of those who brought the Organization into existence almost 80 years ago.
