I did not intend to come here this year. My country is at war, fighting for its life. But after I heard the lies and slanders levelled at my country by many of the speakers at this rostrum, I decided to come here and set the record straight. I decided to come here to speak for my people, to speak for my country and to speak for the truth. And here is the truth — Israel seeks peace. Israel yearns for peace. Israel has made peace and will make peace again.
Yet we face savage enemies who seek our annihilation and we must defend ourselves against those savage murderers. Our enemies seek not only to destroy us, but to destroy our common civilization and return all of us to a dark age of tyranny and terror. When I spoke here last year (see A/78/PV.10), I said that we faced the same timeless choice that Moses put before the people of Israel thousands of years ago as we were about to enter the promised land. Moses told us that our actions would determine whether we bequeath to future generations a blessing or a curse. That is the choice we face today: the curse of Iran’s unremitting aggression or the blessing of a historic reconciliation between Arab and Jew.
In the days that followed that speech, the blessing I spoke of came into sharper focus. A normalization deal between Saudi Arabia and Israel seemed closer than ever. But then came the curse of 7 October. Thousands of Iranian-backed Hamas terrorists from Gaza burst into Israel in pickup trucks and on motorcycles, and they committed unimaginable atrocities. They savagely murdered 1,200 people. They raped and mutilated women. They beheaded men. They burned babies alive. They burned entire families alive — babies, children, parents, grandparents. It seemed reminiscent of the Nazi Holocaust.
Hamas kidnapped 251 people from dozens of different countries, dragging them into the dungeons of Gaza. Israel has brought home 154 of those hostages, including 117 who returned alive. I want to assure everyone that we will not rest until the remaining hostages are brought home too, and some of their family members are here with us today. I ask them to stand up.
With us is Eli Shtivi, whose son Idan was abducted from the Nova music festival. That was his crime — a music festival. And those murderous monsters took him. With us is Koby Samerano, whose son Jonathan was murdered, and his corpse was taken into the dungeons, into the terror tunnels of Gaza — a corpse held hostage. With us is Salem Alatrash, whose brother Mohammad, a brave Arab Israeli soldier, was murdered. His body, too, was taken to Gaza, and so was the body of Ifat Haiman’s daughter, Inbar, who was brutally murdered at that same music festival. With us is Sharon Sharabi, whose brother Yossi was murdered and who prays for his older brother Eli, who is still held hostage in Gaza. And with us too is Yizhar Lifshitz from Kibbutz Nir Oz, a kibbutz that was wiped out by the terrorists. Thankfully, we achieved the release of his mother, Yocheved, but his father, Oded, is still languishing in the underground terrorist hell of Hamas. I again promise them that we will bring their loved ones home. We will not spare that effort until that holy mission is accomplished.
The curse of 7 October began when Hamas invaded Israel from Gaza, but it did not end there. Israel was soon forced to defend itself on six more war fronts, organized by Iran. On 8 October, Hizbullah attacked us from Lebanon. Since then, it has fired over 8,000 rockets at our towns and cities, at our civilians, at our children. Two weeks later, the Iran-backed Houthis in Yemen launched drones and missiles at Israel, the first of 250 such attacks, including one yesterday aimed at Tel Aviv. Iran’s Shiite militias in Syria and Iraq have targeted Israel dozens of times over the past year as well.
Fuelled by Iran, Palestinian terrorists in Judea and Samaria have perpetrated scores of attacks there and throughout Israel. Last April, for the first time ever, Iran directly attacked Israel from its own territory, firing 300 drones, cruise missiles and ballistic missiles at us. I have a message for the tyrants of Tehran. If they strike us, we will strike them. There is no place — there is no place in Iran — that the long arm of Israel cannot reach. That is true of the entire Middle East. Far from being lambs led to the slaughter, Israel’s soldiers have fought back with incredible courage and with heroic sacrifice. And I have another message for the Assembly and for the world outside the Hall. We are winning.
As Israel defends itself against Iran in that seven-front war, the lines separating the blessing and the curse could not be clearer. I have with me the map I presented here last year. It is a map of a blessing. It shows Israel and its Arab partners forming a land bridge connecting Asia and Europe between the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Across the bridge, we will lay rail lines, energy pipelines and fibre optic cables, and that will serve the betterment of 2 billion people.
Now let us look at the second map. It is a map of a curse. It is a map of an arc of terror that Iran has created and imposed from the Indian Ocean to the Mediterranean. Iran’s malignant arc has shut down international waterways. It cuts off trade, destroys nations from within and inflicts misery on millions. On the one hand, we see a bright blessing, a future of hope; on the other hand, a dark future of despair. And if anyone thinks that the dark map is a curse for Israel alone, then they should think again, because Iran’s aggression, if not checked, will endanger every single country of the Middle East and many, many countries in the rest of the world, because Iran seeks to impose its radicalism well beyond the Middle East. That is why it funds terror networks on five continents. That is why it builds ballistic missiles for nuclear warheads to threaten the entire world. For too long, the world has appeased Iran. It turns a blind eye to its internal repression. It turns a blind eye to its external aggression. Well, that appeasement must end and that appeasement must end now.
Nations of the world should support the brave people of Iran who want to rid themselves of that evil regime. Responsible Governments should not only support Israel in rolling back Iran’s aggression, but they should join Israel. They should join Israel in stopping Iran’s nuclear weapons programme.
In this body and the Security Council, we are going to have a deliberation in a few months, and I call on the Security Council to snap back its own sanctions against Iran because we must all do everything in our power to ensure that Iran never gets nuclear weapons. For decades, I have been warning the world against Iran’s nuclear programme. Our actions delayed that programme by perhaps a decade, but we have not stopped it. We have delayed it, but we have not stopped it. Iran now seeks to weaponize its nuclear programme. For the sake of the peace and security of all countries — for the sake of the peace and security of the entire world — we must not let that happen. I assure all present that Israel will do everything in its power to make sure that it does not happen.
The question before us is simple. Which of those two maps that I have shown will shape our future? Will it be the blessings of peace and prosperity for Israel, our Arab partners and the rest of the world, or will it be the curse in which Iran and its proxies spread carnage and chaos everywhere?
Israel has already made its choice. We have decided to advance the blessing. We are building a partnership for peace with our Arab neighbours while fighting the forces of terror that threaten that peace. For nearly a year, the brave men and women of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) have been systematically crushing Hamas’s terror army that once ruled Gaza. On 7 October, the day of that invasion into Israel, that terror army numbered nearly 40,000 terrorists. It was armed with more than 15,000 rockets. It had 350 miles of terror tunnels — an underground network bigger than the New York subway system — which it used to wreak havoc above and below ground.
A year later, the IDF has killed or captured more than half of those terrorists, destroyed over 90 per cent of their rocket arsenal and eliminated the key segments of their terror tunnel network. In measured military operations, we have destroyed nearly all of Hamas’s terror battalions — 23 out of 24 battalions. Now, to complete our victory, we are focused on mopping up Hamas’s remaining fighting capabilities. We are taking out senior terrorist commanders and destroying remaining terrorist infrastructure. But all the while — and I will say this one more time — we remain focused on our sacred mission of bringing our hostages home and we will not stop until that mission is complete.
Now, even with Hamas’s greatly diminished military capability, the terrorists still exercise some governing power in Gaza by stealing the food that we enable aid agencies to bring into Gaza. Hamas steals the food and then it hikes the prices. It feeds its own bellies and then it fills its coffers with money it extorts from its own people. It sells the stolen food at exorbitant prices, and that is how it stays in power. Well, that too has to end and we are working to bring it to an end. And the reason is simple. If Hamas stays in power, it will regroup, rearm and attack Israel again and again and again, as it has vowed to do. So, Hamas has got to go.
It is hard to imagine, but there are those who say that Hamas has to stay and has to be part of a post-war Gaza. Can anyone imagine, in a post-war situation after the Second World War, allowing the defeated Nazis in 1945 to rebuild Germany? It is inconceivable. It is ridiculous. It did not happen then and it is not going to happen now. That is why Israel will reject any role for Hamas in a post-war Gaza. We do not seek to resettle Gaza. What we seek is a demilitarized and deradicalized Gaza. Only then can we ensure that this round of fighting will be the last round of fighting. We are ready to work with regional and other partners to support a local civilian administration in Gaza, committed to peaceful coexistence.
As for the hostages, I have a message for the Hamas captors. Let them go. Let them go — all of them. Those alive today must be returned alive and the remains of those whom Hamas brutally killed must be returned to their families. Those families here with us today and others in Israel deserve to have a resting place for their loved ones, a place where they can grieve and remember them.
The war can come to an end now. All that has to happen is for Hamas to surrender, lay down its arms and release all the hostages. But if it does not, we will fight until we achieve victory — total victory. There is no substitute for it. Israel must also defeat Hizbullah in Lebanon. Hizbullah is the quintessential terror organization in the world today. It has tentacles that span all continents. It has murdered more Americans and more Frenchmen than any group except Bin Laden. It has murdered the citizens of many countries represented in the Hall and it has attacked Israel viciously over the past 20 years. In the past year, completely unprovoked, a day after the Hamas massacre on 7 October, Hizbullah began attacks against Israel that forced more than 60,000 Israelis on our northern border to leave their homes, becoming refugees in their own land. Hizbullah turned vibrant towns in the north of Israel into ghost towns.
I want everyone to think about that in equivalent American terms. Can anyone imagine if terrorists turned El Paso and San Diego into ghost towns? Then they should ask themselves how long the American Government would tolerate that — a day, a week, a month? I doubt it would tolerate that for even a single day. Yet Israel has been tolerating this intolerable situation for nearly a year. Well, I have come here today to say that enough is enough. We will not rest until our citizens can return safely to their homes. We will not accept a terror army perched on our northern border, able to perpetrate another 7 October-style massacre.
For 18 years, Hizbullah brazenly refused to implement Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), which requires it to move its forces away from our borders. Instead, Hizbullah moved right up to our border. It secretly dug terror tunnels to infiltrate our communities and indiscriminately fired thousands of rockets into our towns and villages. It fires those rockets and missiles not from military sites — it does that too — but after they place them in schools, in hospitals, in apartment buildings and in the private homes of the citizens of Lebanon. It endangers its own people. It puts a missile in every kitchen, a rocket in every garage. I said to the people of Lebanon this week: “Get out of the death trap that Hizbullah has put you in. Do not let Nasrallah drag Lebanon into the abyss. We are not at war with you. We are at war with Hizbullah, which has hijacked your country and threatens to destroy ours.”
As long as Hizbullah chooses the path of war, Israel has no choice and Israel has every right to remove that threat and return our citizens to their homes safely. That is exactly what we are doing. Just this week, the IDF destroyed large percentages of Hizbullah’s rockets, which were built with Iran’s funding for three decades. We took out senior military commanders who shed not only Israeli blood but American and French blood as well. And then we took out their replacements, and then the replacements of their replacements. And we will continue degrading Hizbullah until all our objectives are met.
We are committed to removing the curse of terrorism that threatens all civilized societies, but to truly realize the blessing of a new Middle East we must continue on the path we paved with the Abraham Accords four years ago. Above all, that means achieving a historic peace agreement between Israel and Saudi Arabia. Having seen the blessings that we have already brought with the Abraham Accords, the millions of Israelis who have already flown back and forth across the Arabian Peninsula over the skies of Saudi Arabia to the Gulf countries, the trade, the tourism, the joint ventures, the peace — I say, what blessings such a peace with Saudi Arabia would bring. It would be a boon to the security and economy of our two countries. It would boost trade and tourism across the region. It would help transform the Middle East into a global juggernaut. Our two countries could cooperate on energy, water, agriculture, artificial intelligence and many, many other fields. Such a peace, I am sure, would be a true pivot of history. It would usher in a historic reconciliation between the Arab world and Israel, between Islam and Judaism, between Mecca and Jerusalem.
While Israel is committed to achieving such a peace, Iran and its terror proxies are committed to scuttling it. That is why one of the best ways to foil Iran’s nefarious designs is to achieve the peace. Such a peace would be the foundation for an even broader Abrahamic alliance, and that alliance would include the United States, Israel’s current Arab peace partners, Saudi Arabia and others who choose the blessing of peace. It would advance security and prosperity across the Middle East and bring enormous benefits to the rest of the world. With American support and leadership, I believe that this vision can materialize much sooner than people think, and as the Prime Minister of Israel I will do everything in my power to make it happen. This is an opportunity that we and the world should not let go by.
Israel has made its choice. We seek to move forward to a bright age of prosperity and peace. Iran and its proxies have also made their choice. They want to move back to a dark age of terror and war. And now I have a question, and I pose that question to everyone here. What choice will they make? Will their nations stand with Israel? Will they stand with democracy and peace or will they stand with Iran, a brutal dictatorship that subjugates its own people and exports terrorism across the globe? In this battle between good and evil, there must be no equivocation. When you stand with Israel, you stand for your own values and your own interests. Yes, we are defending ourselves, but we are also defending everyone else against a common enemy that, through violence and terror, seeks to destroy our way of life.
There should be no confusion about that, but unfortunately, there is a lot of it in many countries and in this very Hall, as I have just heard. Good is portrayed as evil and evil is portrayed as good. We see that moral confusion when Israel is falsely accused of genocide when we defend ourselves against enemies who try to commit genocide against us. We see it, too, when Israel is absurdly accused by the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor of deliberately starving Palestinians in Gaza. What an absurdity. We help bring 700,000 tons of food into Gaza. That is more than 3,000 calories a day for every man, woman and child in Gaza. We see that moral confusion when Israel is falsely accused of deliberately targeting civilians. We do not want to see a single innocent person die. That is always a tragedy, and it is why we do so much to minimize civilian casualties, even as our enemies use civilians as human shields. No army has done what Israel is doing to minimize civilian casualties. We drop flyers. We send text messages. We make phone calls by the millions to ensure that Palestinian civilians get out of harm’s way. We spare no effort in that noble pursuit.
We see yet another profound moral confusion when self-described progressives march against the democracy of Israel. Do they not realize that they are supporting the Iranian-backed goons in Teheran and in Gaza — the goons who shoot down protesters, murder women for not covering their hair and hang gays in public squares? Some progressives they are. According to the United States Director of National Intelligence, Iran funds and fuels many of the protesters against Israel — who knows, maybe some of the protesters or even many of the protesters outside this building now?
King Solomon, who reigned in our eternal capital, Jerusalem, 3,000 years ago, proclaimed something that is familiar to all. He said that there is nothing new under the sun. Well, in an age of space travel, quantum physics and artificial intelligence, some would argue that that is a debatable statement. But one thing is undeniable — there is definitely nothing new at the United Nations. Take it from me. I first spoke from this rostrum as Israel’s ambassador to the United Nations in 1984 (see A/39/PV.32). That is exactly 40 years ago. In my maiden speech here, I spoke against a proposal to expel Israel from this body. Four decades later, I find myself defending Israel against that same preposterous proposal.
And who is leading the charge this time? Not Hamas, but Abbas — Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. That is the man who claims he wants peace with Israel, yet he still refuses to condemn the horrific massacre of 7 October. He is still paying hundreds of millions to terrorists who murder Israelis and Americans. It is called pay-for-slay. The more you murder, the more you get paid. And he still wages unremitting diplomatic warfare against Israel’s right to exist and against Israel’s right to defend itself. And by the way, they amount to the same thing, because if you cannot defend yourself you cannot exist — not in our neighbourhood, certainly, and maybe not in anyone else’s.
Standing at this rostrum 40 years ago, I told the sponsors of that outrageous resolution to expel Israel: “Gentlemen, check your fanaticism at the door” (A/39/ PV.32, para. 83). Today, I tell President Abbas and all who would shamefully support that resolution: “Check your fanaticism at the door.” The singling out of the one and only Jewish State continues to be a moral stain on the United Nations. It has made this once-respected institution contemptible in the eyes of decent people everywhere. But for the Palestinians, this United Nations house of darkness is home court. They know that in this swamp of antisemitic bile, there is an automatic majority willing to demonize the Jewish State for anything. In this anti-Israel flat-Earth society, any false charge, any outlandish allegation can muster a majority.
In the past decade, there have been more resolutions adopted against Israel in the General Assembly Hall than against the entire world combined. Actually, there have been more than twice as many. Since 2014, this body has condemned Israel 174 times. It has condemned all the other countries in the world 73 times. That is more than 100 extra condemnations for the Jewish State. What hypocrisy. What a double standard. What a joke.
So, all the speeches we have heard today and all the hostility directed at Israel this year are not about Gaza; they are about Israel. They have always been about Israel — about Israel’s very existence. And I say that until Israel, until the Jewish State, is treated like other nations, until this antisemitic swamp is drained, the United Nations will be viewed by fair-minded people everywhere as nothing more than a contemptible farce.
Given the antisemitism at the United Nations, it should surprise no one that the Prosecutor at the ICC, one of the United Nations affiliated bodies, is considering issuing arrest warrants against me and Israel’s Defence Minister, the democratically elected leaders of the democratic State of Israel. The ICC Prosecutor’s rush to judgment, his refusal to treat Israel with its independent courts the way other democracies are treated, is hard to explain by anything other than pure antisemitism.
The real war criminals are not in Israel. They are in Iran. They are in Gaza, in Syria, in Lebanon, in Yemen. Those who stand with the war criminals and who stand with evil against good, with the curse against the blessing — they should be ashamed of themselves. But I have a message for them. Israel will win this battle. We will win this battle because we do not have a choice. After generations in which our people were slaughtered, remorselessly butchered, and no one raised a finger in our defence, we now have a State. We now have a brave army, an army of incomparable courage, and we are defending ourselves.
As the Book of Samuel says in The Bible, “The eternity of Israel will not falter”. In the Jewish people’s epic journey from antiquity, in our odyssey through the tempest and upheavals of modern times, that ancient promise has always been kept and it will hold true for all time. To borrow a great poet’s phrase, Israel will not go gently into that good night. We will never need to rage against the dying of the light because the torch of Israel will forever shine bright. To the people of Israel and to the soldiers of Israel, I say: Be strong and of good courage. The people of Israel live now, tomorrow, forever.
