We are living in very complex times, and the shared nature of the challenges of our era is forcing us to think about things in a completely new way. The wound inflicted on the rules-based international order by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is having destabilizing effects far beyond the borders within which it is unfolding, with a domino effect that is reigniting other flashpoints and even causing them to erupt. Democratic political systems are facing unprecedented threats. Geoeconomic fragmentation is growing, and all of us must deal with its consequences, especially the most vulnerable nations. The path to reducing environmental emissions has reached a crossroads, caught between ideological approaches and a solidarity that is in short supply, especially among the major greenhouse-gas emitters. Water and energy scarcity is having an increasingly serious impact on development, food security and the social stability of entire communities. The exploitation of religious faith has become a source of tension, or worse, of persecution — millions worldwide are suffering for professing their faith, with Christians at the top of the list of victims.
We are witnessing the groundbreaking advent of generative artificial intelligence — a revolution that raises entirely new questions, although I am not sure we should call it “intelligence”. Intelligence entails asking questions, not answering them through data-processing. In any case, unlike any other innovation in history, this technology is a blueprint for a world in which progress no longer optimizes human skills but supersedes them, with potentially tragic consequences, especially for the labour market, with wealth becoming even more concentrated at the top. It is no coincidence that Italy made this issue a top priority of its presidency of the Group of Seven (G7), because we want to do our part in defining a global governance for artificial intelligence that is able to strike a balance among innovation, rights, labour, intellectual property, freedom of expression and democracy.
That complexity, compounded by deeply intertwined challenges, tells us one thing above all. The problems of the so-called global South are also the problems of the global North, and vice versa. Homogeneous blocs no longer exist, and the interdependence of our destinies is a fact. By comparison to the way we thought in the past, we are therefore being called on to think outside the box. The challenge is to effect a decisive paradigm shift in relations between nations and in terms of how multilateral bodies work. The goal is to build an entirely new model of cooperation. I am personally convinced that this new model can and must be based on a number of principles that unfortunately are not a given — mutual respect, concrete action and collaboration. If we are to do that, we must relate to each of us on an equal footing and rekindle our capacity to listen to others in order to understand their thinking — the basis for any form of mutual trust.
It is precisely because we believe in that approach that Italy convened all of the events under its presidency of the G7 this year in an open format, with a very broad outreach involving every continent, the Group of 20, the African Union, the economic and financial institutions and the multilateral development banks. We have shown that the G7 is not a sealed fortress seeking to fend off others but rather a group that offers values and is open to the world.
The turning point in Italy’s relations with Africa in particular also comes to mind. We have made the Mattei Plan, our investment plan for Africa, operational at the bilateral level, with pilot projects in nine of the continent’s nations, creating strategic partnerships with each of them. We have structured operational synergies with the European Union’s Global Gateway and the G7’s Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment. We have built new financial instruments with the African Development Bank and the World Bank, with a view to enabling the flow of both public and private resources. We have devised innovative solutions such as the G7 Apulia Food Systems Initiative to strengthen food production and food security, as well as Africa’s capacity to support the production and distribution of clean energy. We have decided to support strategic projects for Africa such as the Lobito Corridor.
We have done all of that without ceasing to involve and exchange inputs with our African interlocutors, because we intend not to impose but rather to share and choose priority sectors of intervention together, as well as areas of action where we can contribute added value. We have offered our perspective and our cooperation with concrete projects that are already giving results. We are turning 36,000 hectares of desert terrain in Algeria into fertile land for crop cultivation and building a local facility for processing and production. In Kenya, a biofuel plant is in development, to be completed by the end of 2025 and able to support as many as 200,000 farming enterprises. We have collaborated on a large environmental recovery plan in western Ethiopia.
I would like to once again reiterate our objective with respect to the tens of thousands of people who are considering desperate journeys in order to enter Europe illegally. First of all, we want to guarantee their right to not have to emigrate and cut ties with their homeland simply because they have no choice. That is a desperate decision that reckless and increasingly powerful criminal organizations profit from. A year ago, from this rostrum, I proposed that we declare a global war on human traffickers (see A/78/PV.7), and I am pleased that the appeal did not fall on deaf ears. The G7 has reached a coordination agreement aimed at dismantling criminal networks.
However, we need to do more, and the United Nations needs to do more, because these criminal activities are taking on different forms. One such is slavery, understood as trafficking in human beings, which the General Assembly has played a fundamental role in definitively eliminating from the world. We will not return to the past. Defeating the slave trade of the third millennium is possible, and we can do it if we join forces with greater cooperation and joint initiatives among our police forces, intelligence services and judicial authorities, as well as by adopting the “follow the money” formula. That was something that the great Italian judges Giovanni Falcone and Paulo Borsellino understood and that became a model even at the international level in the fight against criminal organizations. It is a method that Italy also intends to use to strengthen its cooperation with Latin America, because there is a common denominator linking organizations that profit from human trafficking in Africa to those that manage narco-trafficking in Latin America, or the abominable and unscrupulous abduction of children to make them rich men’s sex slaves, depriving them of both a present and a future.
Unfortunately, as in too many other regions of the world, Latin America’s legitimate aspirations for freedom and democracy, the aspirations of tens of millions of people, continue to be unfulfilled. I am thinking in particular of the Venezuelan people, to whom we are giving our full solidarity and support. The international community cannot just stand by and watch as the results of the elections on 28 July have still not been recognized two months later, while at the same time there has been brutal repression, the death of dozens of protesters, the arbitrary arrest of thousands of political opponents and the incrimination and exile of the opposition presidential candidate. It is our duty to raise our voices.
In 2025 we will be celebrating the eightieth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the principles and values that are currently being put in question by none other than a permanent member of the Security Council. We in Italy will not cease defending those principles and values, because they serve as a guarantee for all, especially those countries that are less equipped to defend themselves. Not only is no one above the law, but on the contrary, the law is all the more necessary to defend the more vulnerable. We therefore cannot turn our backs on Ukraine, which is defending its borders, sovereignty and freedom.
We also affirm the right of the State of Israel to defend itself from external attacks like the one that occurred on 7 October 2023. At the same time, we ask Israel to respect international law by protecting the civilian populations who are also victims of Hamas and its destructive choices. Based on the same reasoning, we clearly believe in the right of the Palestinian people to their own State. However, for that to happen, we need Palestinians to follow a leadership that is inspired by dialogue, stabilizing the Middle East and autonomy. The Abraham Accords demonstrated the possibility of advantageous coexistence and cooperation on the basis of mutual recognition. If that is the basis on which we all have to work, it is now imperative to reach a ceasefire in Gaza without further delay and to secure the immediate release of the Israeli hostages. We cannot continue to witness tragedies like those we have seen in southern and eastern Lebanon involving helpless civilians, many of them children.
That said, next year’s anniversary is a historic opportunity to understand, finally, whether we like it or not, that today’s problems involve and are the business of all of us. We must be able to question ourselves with humility and awareness. That also requires serious reflection on multilateralism and the capacity of international organizations in this era to rise to the challenges that we are facing. Obviously, I am also talking about the United Nations and its capacity for reform, starting with what is useful and necessary — not what is easier. Italy firmly believes that no reform of the architecture and functioning of the United Nations, starting with the Security Council, can happen without considering the principles of equality, democracy and representativeness. It would be a mistake to create new hierarchies with new permanent seats. We are open to discussing reform without prejudice, but we want reforms that represent everyone better and not just a few.
This is a difficult time to be called to govern our countries. Everything around us is changing and being put in question. The very few certainties we thought we had are no longer the same. Destiny is challenging us and putting us to the test. But we can show that we are up to the task. We can show our citizens, our children and ourselves — perhaps above all ourselves — that we can govern. As a great Italian patriot, Carlo Pisacane, a protagonist of the Risorgimento that united Italy into a nation, said, every reward can be found in the depths of my conscience. We have to face problems instead of pushing them away. We must look at what is important and useful. That is our duty. It is a hard one but it is necessary, and as always, Italy is ready to do its part.
