I extend Jamaica’s congratulations to you, Sir, on your election to the leadership of this body. You can be assured of our full commitment to the successful execution of your mandate for the seventy-ninth session.
I also commend your predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, a fellow national of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), for his successful tenure.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, are all facing the same world of multiple and intersecting challenges. The great difference between us, however, is our capacity to meet, withstand and recover from the shocks they bring. If there is one realization we must share, it is that those challenges cannot be solved alone. They can be addressed only through multilateralism, diplomacy and international cooperation.
Jamaica is a small island located in the second-most climate-vulnerable region in the world. We emerged from a brutal history of slavery and colonization, achieving political independence a mere 62 years ago. Until recently, most of our independent history has been characterized by high levels of poverty, debt and unemployment, but as we chart a course towards sustainable prosperity, we are determined that those characteristics will not define the Jamaica we bequeath to future generations.
Against the odds, Jamaica has been building its resilience. Our macroeconomic fundamentals today are stronger than they have been at any time over the past 50 years. Our credit ratings have been upgraded by international rating agencies and our fiscal credibility has improved. Jamaica is now an attractive destination for investment. Over the past 10 years, in spite of the pandemic, we have more than halved our debt-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratio, significantly reduced our poverty rate, brought unemployment to historic lows and increased our minimum wage by more than 100 per cent. Our management of the economy has created fiscal space that has allowed us to invest more in social welfare, national security, health care and education. Through our national broadband network project, we have increased Internet penetration to 77 per cent and Internet user penetration to 85.1 per cent. We are closing our domestic digital divide, providing more and better Government services online. We have also embarked on Jamaica’s largest-ever expansion and upgrade of infrastructure, using a mix of pure budgetary financing and public-private partnerships.
Those advancements have been hard-won. Our effort has required social, political and international partnership, measured policy and strategic management. Even as we acknowledge the sacrifices made to enable our achievements, we recognize that our many successes can be eroded by exogenous shocks, including climate change, which we view as a clear and present danger to humankind.
As a small island developing State (SID), Jamaica is severely affected by higher temperatures, warmer seas, sea level rise and the increased intensity and frequency of natural disasters. Hurricane Beryl, which impacted the Caribbean in July, was the earliest Category 5 hurricane on record. Beryl resulted in the dislocation of families and communities, along with significant damage to infrastructure, houses, schools and farms. Damage was most severe in our agricultural belt, wiping out crops, killing livestock and triggering the knock-on effects of higher food prices and inflation. Our new climate-smart agricultural practices were no match for the hurricane; its winds took the panels for solar-powered irrigation pumps and flattened 70 per cent of greenhouses.
We experience almost half of each year in the uncertainties of a hurricane season. Natural and climate-based disasters continue to set back our efforts to attain the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and realize sustained, inclusive growth and development. We have therefore sought to strengthen our ability to respond to, and recover from, such disasters through a risk-layered approach to disaster response financing. Jamaica has therefore significantly increased resources to our Contingency Fund and the National Natural Disaster Reserve Fund. We have established the National Disaster Fund, triggered by measured impact on GDP, and became the first small island developing State to independently sponsor a catastrophe bond. Additionally, we participate in the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility. Those mechanisms, however, do not reduce the occurrence of disasters or prevent the disruption, dislocation and destruction they cause.
It bears repeating that no country can combat the effects of climate change on its own. Jamaica therefore affirms its unwavering commitment to international cooperation to counter the negative impacts of climate change and to the pursuit of climate justice. We urge the major polluting nations to honour their commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and to meet their finance obligations.
Furthermore, we welcome the adoption of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS at the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States. More particularly, Jamaica endorses the calls for a redoubling of international cooperation and action to accelerate mitigation and adaptation. All countries must adopt or maintain the target of limiting global temperature increase to 1.5°C through enhanced nationally determined contributions, based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. Allow me to pause here to congratulate the Government of Antigua and Barbuda on having successfully hosted the Conference.
Jamaica calls on the United Nations and international financial institutions to adopt a new climate finance goal at the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. We further call for the urgent and accelerated mobilization of international action and resources. That includes the full and effective operationalization of the Loss and Damage Fund to address issues of responsiveness and scale that are the most critical to SIDS.
Jamaica welcomes the adoption of the multidimensional vulnerability index. We call on our development partners, including multilateral development banks and other international financial institutions, to urgently examine the index and commence its use. Rather than considering gross national income alone, it accurately takes into account the structural and environmental vulnerabilities of SIDS. Its use by multilateral development banks will better align access to and the terms of financing while supporting those countries’ development needs. Jamaica also commits to advancing dialogue and cooperation with stakeholders in the international capital markets to adapt their operations to the vulnerability-resilience profiles of SIDS. Improved access to development financing is critical for SIDS, which are particularly off-track in attaining the SDGs.
The SDGs were adopted by leaders as a universal clarion call to tackle poverty, ensure peace and promote prosperity. Jamaica shares the concern that, globally, only 17 per cent of the SDG targets are on track. We are proud that our progress is further along domestically and we fully support and are honoured to co-lead the Secretary-General’s SDG Stimulus Leaders Group. International cooperation is urgently needed to drive sustained efforts to tackle structural and systemic issues that constrain access to development financing. Through our collective advocacy, we aim to elevate the global agenda to ensure no one is left behind. We call upon wealthier countries and the international financial institutions to partner with developing countries and redouble their efforts to create and implement innovative strategies to unlock financing and spur investments towards attaining the SDGs.
The upcoming fourth International Conference on Financing for Development will present an opportunity to commit to tangible deliverables to address the current financing challenges. Those include impactful, practical and meaningful reform of the international financial architecture to strengthen the voice and representation of developing countries in international decision-making and to substantially improve the quantity, accessibility and affordability of financing for development.
This brings me to the Summit of the Future. The adoption of the Pact for the Future, the Declaration on Future Generations and the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1) signals renewed hope in multilateralism. The consensus demonstrated our collective resolve to deliver inclusive and durable solutions to current and emerging global challenges. With foresight, political will and joint action, we can deliver a better world for future generations. Jamaica commends the work of Namibia and Germany in their facilitation of the Pact, and we were honoured to have co-facilitated, together with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Declaration on Future Generations.
Jamaica believes in leveraging multilateralism to advance sustainable development, human rights and international peace and security to deliver results for all the peoples of the word. No country or region should be excluded from the opportunities to attain the SDGs. Jamaica therefore again joins the call for the discontinuation of the crippling economic, commercial and financial embargo against our closest Caribbean neighbour, Cuba. We further call for a cessation of the classification of Cuba as a State sponsor of terrorism. Those measures continue to have a devastating impact on the economic and social well-being of the people of Cuba and preclude progress towards their attainment of the SDGs.
Jamaica once again condemns the brutal 7 October attacks in Israel and the devastating counterattacks in the Palestinian territories. The undeniable humanitarian crisis and instability compel all parties to resolve the conflict through dialogue and diplomacy. We commend the United States, Qatar, Jordan, Egypt and others that are making concerted efforts towards a peaceful resolution. We continue to support Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and believe that a two-State solution is the best way to achieve lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. It is in that context that Jamaica has recognized the State of Palestine. We call for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza and the release of hostages to bring an end to the protracted war and human suffering.
Much closer to home, Haiti continues to face one of the most challenging periods in its storied history. Rampant gangs are causing chronic instability and unspeakable violence, especially against women and children. Millions of Haitians are facing hunger and dislocation. They need and deserve the unwavering support of the international community to restore peace, security and democracy and to address the devastating humanitarian crisis.
Jamaica will continue to play its part, including through CARICOM and the Eminent Persons Group, in supporting the political process in Haiti. Significant progress has already been made, particularly since the Kingston talks convened by CARICOM in Jamaica in March. We welcome the installation of the Transitional Presidential Council, the appointment of an interim Prime Minister and ministerial Cabinet and the finalization of the Provisional Electoral Council.
The Multinational Security Support (MSS) mission is critical to the restoration of peace and security in Haiti. We reiterate our gratitude to the Government of Kenya for its leadership of and commitment to the MSS mission. We are pleased to confirm that on 12 September, Jamaica deployed its initial command contingent along with Belize, as part of the MSS mission. We are committed to scaling up to our committed numbers, but we also call on the international community to contribute more personnel and equipment. The restoration of peace and security is critical to the creation of an environment in which free and fair elections can be held. The establishment of democratic governance is critical for sustainable economic growth and development.
Since the deployment of the MSS mission, we have seen improvements in the situation in Haiti and have cause for cautious optimism. More is needed, however, and time is not on Haiti’s side. It is critical that we preserve and advance the gains made. It is critical that we maintain hope and stability. We therefore urge the Security Council to renew the mandate of the MSS mission and to consider future transition to a peacekeeping framework to guarantee funding. We also call for continued and increased support from member states, including financial contributions to the Trust Fund. That is needed for the deployment of additional personnel to support the Haitian National Police as it recovers communities from criminal gangs.
We further call on the international community to significantly increase contributions to the humanitarian response plan for Haiti, which remains underfunded at 39 per cent of the target. Support to the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti must also be ramped up so that displaced families can be fed and provided with critical health care, and children can return to the classrooms to resume their education. Jamaica will continue to do what we are able. We will support our sister CARICOM nation in the effort to restore peace, security and stability in Haiti and, by extension, the region.
Jamaica is seeking to comprehensively address the issue of gangs, crime and violence in our own society, fully recognizing the compounding impact of transnational crime, including illicit trafficking in drugs, arms and ammunition. We have embarked upon a mission of transforming and strengthening our security forces and agencies, while preserving human rights, increasing operational efficiency and delivering high-quality policing services to the public. We have made significant improvement to the working conditions of our police men and women and the National Police College of Jamaica has now received the highest international accreditation for curriculum and quality of training. We continue to expand closed-circuit television networks in collaboration with our stakeholders, have increased mobility and introduced new equipment and technology, including forensics. We have also introduced new community policing models. The Government is also undertaking social interventions in vulnerable communities. We have trained and certified approximately 40,000 at-risk youths and enrolled approximately 81,000 parents in parenting programmes. We are also working closely with the private sector and non-governmental organizations to expand social services in vulnerable communities.
On transnational organized crime, Jamaica has made substantial investments in advanced coastal radar systems and the acquisition of off-shore patrol vessels. We are also increasing the use of technology in securing our ports. As a result of those initiatives, major crimes have consistently declined to the lowest levels in 25 years. So far this year, there has been a 17 per cent decline in homicides over last year. Jamaica is a safer place to live, work, raise families and do business.
We recognize that continued bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation, especially in the areas of training, intelligence sharing and joint operations, is vital if we are to comprehensively and sustainably continue to reduce crime and violence. In that regard, while we appreciate the steps taken, we reiterate our call for more concrete action from bilateral partners to stem the illicit flow of small arms and ammunition from their ports. We welcome the recent outcome of the fourth Review Conference of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat, and Eradicate the Illicit Trade of Small and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. More particularly, we welcome the emphasis placed on technical assistance and capacity-building, customs control, emerging technologies and through-life conventional ammunition management. Those matters are all critically relevant to ultimately turning around crime-ridden inner-city communities into peaceful and prosperous ones.
Cybercrime is a major threat to citizen security and an obstacle to sustained economic development. International cooperation is necessary to address the matter of cybercrime. Jamaica actively participated in the negotiations, together with our fellow CARICOM partners, on the United Nations Convention against Cybercrime. We therefore look forward to the adoption of the Convention by the General Assembly and look forward to future engagements within the framework of that instrument.
In conclusion, Jamaica has taken difficult decisions and has taken responsibility for our economic future. We have demonstrated that we are able to positively impact our own outcomes and redefine our future. We continue to believe not only in our own resolve but also in the power of multilateralism and international cooperation to overcome shared global challenges. The people of the world are counting on the United Nations and the international community to deliver on climate, on human rights, on peace and security and on development. With that support, Jamaica is committed to doing our part to meet the challenges of today, while laying a solid foundation for present and future generations.
