Over the past quarter of a century, I have stood on this rostrum amid regional conflicts, global upheavals and humanitarian crises that have profoundly tested our global community. It often feels as though there has not been a moment when our world was not in turmoil, and yet I cannot recall a time of greater peril than this. Our United Nations is facing a crisis that strikes at its very legitimacy and that is threatening a collapse of global trust and moral authority. The United Nations is under attack, literally and figuratively.
For nearly a year, the sky-blue flag flying over United Nations shelters and schools in Gaza has been powerless to protect innocent civilians from Israeli military bombardment. United Nations aid trucks sit motionless, a few miles from starving Palestinians. Humanitarian workers who proudly wear the emblem of this Organization are disparaged and targeted, and the rulings of the International Court of Justice are defied and its opinions disregarded. It is therefore no surprise that both inside and outside this Hall, trust in the cornerstone principles and ideals of the United Nations is crumbling. The harsh reality that many see is that some nations are above international law, that global justice does bend to the will of power and that human rights are selective, a privilege to be granted or denied at will. We cannot stand for that. We must recognize that undermining our international institutions and global frameworks is one of the gravest threats to our global security today. We must ask ourselves that if we are not nations united in the conviction that all people are equal in rights, dignity and worth and that all countries are equal in the eyes of the law, what kind of world does that leave us with?
The attacks of 7 October on Israeli civilians last year were condemned by countries all over the world, including Jordan, but the unprecedented scale of terror unleashed on Gaza since that day is beyond any justification. The Israeli Government’s assault has resulted in one of the fastest death rates in recent conflicts, one of the fastest rates of starvation caused by war, the largest cohort of child amputees and unprecedented levels of destruction. The current Israeli Government has killed more children, more journalists, more aid workers and more medical personnel than any other war in recent memory.
And let us not forget the attacks on the West Bank. There the Israeli Government has killed more than 700 Palestinians, among them 160 children, since 7 October. The number of Palestinians held in Israeli detention centres exceeds 10,700, including 400 women and 730 children. More than 4,000 Palestinians have been forced from their homes and lands, violence by armed settlers has surged and entire villages have been displaced. In Jerusalem, flagrant violations of the historical and legal status quo at Muslim and Christian holy sites have continued unabated, under the protection and encouragement of members of the Israeli Government. To be clear, that is in the West Bank, not Gaza. Almost 42,000 Palestinians have been killed since 7 October. Is it any wonder that many are questioning how anyone can perceive this war as not deliberately targeting the Palestinians? The level of civilian suffering cannot be written off as unavoidable collateral damage.
I grew up a soldier in a region that is all too familiar with conflict. But there is nothing familiar about this war and the violence unleashed since 7 October. In the absence of global accountability, repeated horrors are normalized, threatening to create a future where anything is permitted anywhere in the world. Is that what we want? Now is the time to ensure the protection of the Palestinian people. It is a moral duty of the international community to establish a protection mechanism for them across the occupied territory. That will guarantee the safety of Palestinians and Israelis from the extremists who are taking our region to the brink of an all-out war. That includes those who continue to propagate the idea of Jordan as an alternative homeland. Let me therefore be very, very clear. That will never happen. We will never accept the forced displacement of Palestinians, which is a war crime.
No country in the region benefits from escalation. We have seen that clearly in the dangerous developments in Lebanon over the past few days. It must stop.
For years, the Arab world has extended a hand to Israel through the Arab Peace Initiative, offering full recognition and normalization in exchange for peace. But consecutive Israeli Governments, emboldened by years of impunity, have rejected peace and have chosen confrontation instead. Impunity gathers force. Left unchecked, it gains momentum. Palestinians have endured more than 57 years of occupation and oppression. During that time, the Israeli Government has been allowed to cross one red line after another. But now Israel’s decades-long impunity is becoming its own worst enemy, and the consequences are everywhere. The Israeli Government has been accused of genocide at the International Court of Justice. Expressions of outrage at its conduct are echoing around the world. Cities everywhere have seen mass protests, and calls for sanctions are growing louder. International frustration with Israel has long been mounting, but it has never been more exposed. For decades Israel has projected itself as a thriving, Western-style democracy in the Middle East, but the brutality of the war on Gaza has forced the world to look closer.
Now many are seeing Israel through the eyes of its victims, and the contradiction — the paradox — is too jarring. The modern, advanced Israel admired from afar, and the Israel that Palestinians have experienced first-hand, simply cannot coexist. Israel will eventually be entirely one or the other. That is the choice that its leaders and people will have to make — to live by the democratic values of freedom, justice and equality for all, or to risk further isolation and rejection. Over and over again we have watched Israel try to achieve security through military means. Each escalation is followed by a pause, until the next, deadlier one.
For years the global community has taken the path of least resistance — accepting the status quo of the ongoing military occupation of Palestinians, all the while paying lip service to a two-State solution. But it has never been more evident that the status quo is untenable. And as the International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion underscored two months ago, it is unequivocally illegal. The Court’s opinion represents a moral imperative for us all. The obligation it carries is one that our nations cannot afford to ignore, for the sake of our world, as well as the future for Palestinians and Israelis alike, because both peoples deserve to live their lives in dignity, free of violence and fear. The only way to achieve that is a just peace grounded in international law, justice, equal rights and mutual recognition. That is something that we, as nations and people everywhere, can and must unite around.
The world is watching, and history will judge us by the courage we show. And it is not just the future that will hold us accountable. It is also the people of the here-and-now. They will judge whether we, as the United Nations, will surrender to inaction or fight to uphold the principles that anchor this institution and our world. Right now they are asking whether we will stand by as parents watch their children waste away, as doctors watch their patients die for lack of basic medical supplies and as more innocent lives are lost because the world failed to act.
The war must end. The hostages and detainees must return home, but every day we wait is one day too long for far too many. I therefore call on all countries to join Jordan in enforcing an international Gaza humanitarian gateway — a massive relief effort to deliver food, clean water, medicine and other vital supplies to those in desperate need, because humanitarian aid should never be a tool of war. Whatever our politics, one truth is undeniable. No people should have to endure such unprecedented suffering, abandoned and alone. We cannot surrender the future to those who thrive on division and conflict. I urge all nations of conscience to unite with Jordan in the critical weeks ahead on this mission. Almost a year into the war, our world has failed politically, but our humanity must not fail the people of Gaza any longer. Echoing the words of my father in the General Assembly 64 years ago, at its fifteenth session (see A/PV.882), I pray that this community of nations may have the courage to decide wisely and fearlessly and will act with the urgent resolve that the crisis and our conscience demand. My father was a man who fought for peace to the very end, and like him, I refuse to leave my children or those of others a future that we have given up on.
