Let me first congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly at the current session. I assure you of my country’s full support and wish you every success in your noble endeavours.
As we gather here, the global system is dangerously close to the breaking point. Dozens of our fellow Member States represented in the Hall are gripped by conflict and instability, claiming many thousands of lives. Entire continents are affected by the climate crisis. Multilateralism is struggling to keep pace, and yet the United Nations is still the indispensable universal Organization. After almost eight decades, it remains a vital platform for dialogue and cooperation on the most acute issues of our time. That undeniable fact compels States to keep working through the United Nations towards a sustainable world. It reinforces our determination to seek global peace and stability. This green rostrum and this Hall remind us that no nation, no matter how powerful, can tackle global problems alone.
The plight of millions of conflict victims worldwide, across the Middle East, Eastern Europe and parts of Africa deserves immediate, decisive and collective action, but the Security Council’s decision-making process is paralysed. As underscored by the Secretary-General, that sad reality undermines the credibility, legitimacy and effectiveness of the Organization as a whole. Having annual discussions about reforming global institutions is no longer enough. It is time to enact the change our world so desperately needs.
Last year from this rostrum, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev of Kazakhstan introduced the initiative of World Unity for a Just Peace and Harmony (see A/78/PV.5). That visionary framework seeks to cultivate peace, stability and security through meaningful and equitable engagement between the global South and global North. The voices of middle Powers and developing nations are vital to bridging divides and nurturing a more effective international security architecture. It is in that spirit that I invite all nations to embrace my country’s initiative. Together, we can pave the way to a more harmonious and united world.
The pressing risk of another nuclear arms race is exacerbating geopolitical polarization. For over four decades, Kazakhstan’s people and land were subjected to the devastating effects of 456 nuclear tests. Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are key pillars of my country’s foreign policy. Kazakhstan is therefore deeply concerned by the escalating rhetoric of nuclear threats. We appeal to all nuclear States to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. I also urge those countries that have not joined the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) to do so as soon as possible for the safety, stability and survival of our world. As the Chair of the third Meeting of States Parties to the TPNW, we will promote the establishment of an international trust fund for assistance to victims of nuclear testing.
Another existential threat no nation can afford to ignore is climate change. This year is expected to be the hottest on record. Droughts, floods and other weather calamities continue to claim lives and damage economies around the globe. We therefore call again on Group of 20 countries and multilateral development banks to share the burden by providing green technologies and concessional financing to low-and middle-income countries, in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Our region stands on the front line of global warming, despite accounting for only 1 per cent of global emissions. Central Asia will face an above-average 2.5 °C increase in temperatures by 2050. That sobering reality has deepened our commitment to addressing climate change. That is why my country will host a regional climate summit in 2026, aimed at further enhancing cooperation among United Nations Members on climate resilience and green transition.
One of the consequences of climate change is water scarcity across the world. It undermines food, energy and ecological systems on every continent. One in four people today lacks access to safe drinking water. If that trend continues, by 2050 more than 5 billion could suffer water shortages. In Central Asia by that time, water deficiency will affect 25 to 30 per cent of the population. Meeting that challenge requires both serious political will and resources, including scientific and economic resources. As the current Chair of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, Kazakhstan is working with regional partners on a long-term and sustainable cooperation mechanism for the effective use of water and energy resources in Central Asia. Our approach takes into account the interests of all stakeholders in irrigation, hydropower and environmental protection.
As the world’s largest landlocked country, Kazakhstan actively promotes the interests of all landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) in addressing the multifaceted challenges our group faces. Despite significant strides, we are still far from implementing the Vienna Programme of Action. We are lagging on critical indicators, particularly the adoption of innovative technologies for trade facilitation and the development of transit and transport corridors. Those challenges magnify the vulnerability of LLDCs, choke off investment, diminish trade and escalate the debt burden.
Furthermore, our geographical constraints prevent us from integrating fully into global trade and economic processes on an equal footing. We are dedicated to advancing our group’s vital interests globally and regionally. My country is already a bridge for 80 per cent of overland transit cargo traffic between Asia and Europe. Kazakhstan is committed to strengthening synergies between the Belt and Road project, the Global Gateway Initiative, the International North-South Transport Corridor and the Trans-Caspian International Transport Route. Together, we have the unique potential to transform our landlocked status into land-linked connectivity.
The Summit of the Future distinctly highlighted digital transformation as the driving force behind the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, but the true key to that shift is ensuring every nation has equitable access to cutting-edge technology. The rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) exacerbates cyberthreats and brings new challenges. That includes its potential uses in warfare, the consequences for data privacy, the risks of misuse for information wars, deepfakes and more. Kazakhstan believes that the United Nations can and must play a leading role in that revolutionary field. We urge technologically and digitally advanced States to take an active part in developing common ethics and standards to govern AI in the most responsible and peaceful way. The establishment of a United Nations AI office would be a welcome step in that direction.
In the current geopolitical landscape, Central Asia is increasingly asserting itself in global affairs. Our region is not only a crossroads of cultures and economies but is also rapidly transforming into a bridge for cooperation between East and West. We adhere to the formula “Successful Central Asia — successful Kazakhstan”. Along with our partners, we are building a more connected and resilient Central Asia through a set of dialogue platforms for the five Central Asian nations and the United States — the C5+ format. Today our regional agenda also includes the development of Afghanistan into a stable and predictable State and a reliable trade partner. In that context, the United Nations Regional Centre for the Sustainable Development Goals for Central Asia and Afghanistan in Almaty will be a game-changer for coordinated Sustainable Development Goal delivery. We do hope that this innovative undertaking will receive the broad support of Member States.
Upholding human rights is not merely an aspiration but one of the key prerequisites of sustainable development. It is also the best antidote against inequalities that are often the root cause of instability and conflicts. Our national reforms are aimed at building a just and fair Kazakhstan based on inclusivity, transparency and the rule of law. My country has abolished the death penalty, instituted a zero-tolerance policy against torture and strengthened national preventive mechanisms. To reinforce our commitment to the values of life and humanity, Kazakhstan, along with our Central Asian neighbours and Mongolia, is spearheading the initiative to become the first region entirely free of the death penalty.
Safeguarding women’s rights and ensuring children’s safety are top priorities of my President and Government. We are advancing the Human Rights Council agenda by proposing impactful resolutions focused on child education and combating domestic violence. As one of the champions of the repatriation of women and children from conflict zones in the Middle East, Kazakhstan will host an international conference in 2025 on best practices in the field of repatriation and reintegration. Through partnerships with United Nations Volunteers, we are creating new opportunities for young people and actively promoting 2026 as the International Year of Volunteers for Sustainable Development.
Both at home and on the global stage, Kazakhstan and its people stand resolute in our commitment to building a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future. Central to that mission is our unwavering dedication to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, embodying our shared aspirations for humankind. As we look ahead to the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations next year, I urge all States to unite in fully implementing this ambitious agenda. We have the chance to transform that upcoming historical milestone into a true celebration of shared achievements. Let the Summit of the Future and this session of the General Assembly mark the beginning of a transformative journey towards a brighter and more inclusive future for all of us, our children and coming generations.
