I extend my congratulations to the African nations and Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I wish you success in this responsible position and assure you that Kyrgyzstan will provide full support to your presidency in the interests of peace and sustainable development. I also express my gratitude to Mr. Dennis Francis for his active work as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session.
On behalf of the Kyrgyz Republic, I reaffirm our commitment to international law and the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and express our full support for the Organization’s efforts to ensure international security; address global social, economic and climate challenges; and protect human rights and freedoms.
Modern global challenges, such as the climate crisis, threats to food security and growing inequality, require the united efforts of the international community. In this turbulent period, I urge all States to continue to support the United Nations in its core mission — to ensure peace and prevent contemporary risks and threats. Now, more than ever, that support is crucial.
I hope that under the leadership of Secretary-General António Guterres, and with the active support of Member States, our Organization will be able to effectively fulfil its functions and help countries to address pressing global issues.
We live in a world that is becoming increasingly unpredictable and complex every year. We are facing unprecedented challenges — a global climate catastrophe, economic inequality that divides peoples and continents and, of course, conflicts that destroy hope for a peaceful future. We are currently witnessing global military expenditure increases every year, while poor and vulnerable States lack the resources they need for their development and survival.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to two conflicting realities of our time.
The first reality is unlimited spending on military needs. According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, in 2023 global military expenditures increased by 6.8 per cent, reaching a record level of $2.5 trillion per year, or 2.3 per cent of global gross domestic product — the highest amount in decades. Leading Powers are allocating vast resources to creating and developing armed forces, expanding arsenals and developing new, more destructive weapons. Unfortunately, this is happening in a world where many nations and people still lack access to basic services such as water, healthcare and education.
We must ensure that the money spent on war, destruction and death goes to creating common goods or to addressing global challenges for the benefit of humankind, to helping countries in their fight against climate change and to preventing mass displacement and global migration.
Military expenditures and armed conflicts have a devastating effect on many countries, exacerbating poverty and inequality. Conflicts and armed clashes have led to the destruction of infrastructure, a drop in living standards and mass migration, creating a vicious cycle of poverty and instability. While some countries are increasing their military budgets, many of those in need are losing the opportunity for a normal life.
The second reality is the lack of progress in providing aid to poor and vulnerable countries. We all know that economic inequality continues to rise. World leaders have been talking for decades about the need to eliminate poverty, but there is always a lack of willpower. Countries in Africa, South Asia and Latin America continue to face chronic underfunding, a lack of support from the international community and systemic economic crises that cannot be solved by individual countries alone. Countries at the very bottom of the economic pyramid desperately need investment in healthcare, education, infrastructure and climate change mitigation. However, with the rapid growth of military spending, assistance to those countries is becoming increasingly insufficient. Humanitarian aid and development assistance programmes are often underfunded, while resources that could be directed towards social needs are spent on purchasing weapons and conducting military operations. The inequalities between States are not only persisting, but intensifying.
The world faces an important choice. We can continue to increase arms, seeking security through military power, or we can choose the path of sustainable development aimed at eradicating poverty and supporting the most vulnerable. Resources that are spent on military needs could make a huge contribution to addressing global challenges, whether it be access to clean water, education for children in developing countries, fighting famine or financing climate change programmes. To make progress in that direction, coordinated efforts between the richest and the least developed countries are needed.
First, developed countries must not only increase financial aid to the least developed countries but also focus on targeted infrastructure and social development projects.
Secondly, the least developed countries must actively participate in international sustainable development initiatives and commit to using resources effectively rather than spending them without direction.
Thirdly, the transfer of modern technologies from wealthier countries to poorer ones is crucial, enabling struggling nations to develop their economies independently and reduce dependence on external assistance.
Today we observe that geopolitical conflicts require not only increased defence spending, but, more importantly, international cooperation for their resolution. If the global community can unite its efforts to equitably distribute resources, help vulnerable States and address the root causes of armed conflict, we can build a safer and more prosperous world for all. If we begin to invest in people instead of war — in education, healthcare and sustainable development instead of weapons — we can undoubtedly build a prosperous world. It is time to rethink global security priorities. Security is not merely about powerful armies and weapons of mass destruction. True security is achieved through trust, equality and the prosperity of nations. By investing in the future of the least developed countries, helping them to combat poverty and providing opportunities for sustainable growth, we can create a more stable and secure world.
In that context, I believe that it is crucial and fair for the world community to pay greater attention to the issues of sustainable development in the global South and to champion the interests of the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States.
One of the most dangerous challenges threatening the very existence of our planet is climate change, which is worsening every day and affects almost all countries and peoples worldwide. The accelerated melting of glaciers, the increasing frequency of natural disasters and the reduction of water resources in mountain ecosystems are deeply concerning. These negative consequences threaten the lives of local communities, contribute to rising poverty levels and the deterioration of infrastructure and significantly harm national economies. Kyrgyzstan faces a triple challenge, namely, the need to invest in development, reduce poverty and adapt to climate change in order to achieve carbon neutrality. Each of those areas requires special financing, especially in the context of ensuring climate resilience for our country and vulnerable communities. We are determined to succeed by working together with our partners.
Kyrgyzstan proposes strengthening and globally promoting the debt-for-nature swap mechanism. We believe it will help developing countries and the least developed countries jointly combat climate change. Kyrgyzstan supports the Secretary-General’s position on the need to reform the international financial architecture and reduce the debt burden of developing countries. We also propose a mechanism for swapping external debt for climate and sustainable development projects, and we are working to creating a climate trust fund that will finance environmental projects in mountainous regions. The Kyrgyz Republic pays special attention to climate issues in the implementation of its national policy and, based on the principles of green development, has set an ambitious goal of achieving carbon neutrality by 2050. More than 95 per cent of our energy is produced mainly by hydropower plants, which are the main driver towards achieving the goal of net-zero emissions. Our country has extensive opportunities to integrate renewable energy sources into various sectors of the economy, develop electric transport infrastructure, promote sustainable agriculture and enhance ecotourism. We are taking active measures to stimulate the use of electric vehicles and improve the energy efficiency of buildings.
I would like to give just one example of our commitment to build a green future. We know that projects aimed at sustainable development, such as Neom in Saudi Arabia, Masdar City in United Arab Emirates, Western Harbour in Sweden and Solar Valley in China, are being implemented and successfully developed. The dreams of the peoples of those countries have become a reality and serve as an example for us too. On the shores of Lake Issyk-Kul, we began construction on a modern and innovative city Asman. Next year, we will begin construction of another green city, Kemin. We are striving to build green cities that will serve as a model for other regions of our country, helping to preserve nature for future generations. I am confident that the city will become an economic, trade, cultural and tourist hub and a centre for innovation and new technologies.
Central Asia is becoming an important region for global security and the world economy. Kyrgyzstan, together with neighbouring States, continues to work on the sustainable development of the region. Together with Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, we are building the Kambar-Ata-1 hydropower plant, which will meet the region’s energy and water needs. We are also participating in the construction of the China-Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan railway, which will enhance trade and transport cooperation and connect the east and west of the continent.
The future of our world depends on the path we choose. We should not increase military spending, leading to the further escalation of conflicts and disasters. Instead, we must direct our efforts towards building a just, safe and prosperous world for all. Our choice today will determine what tomorrow will be like for future generations. We must all ease international tensions. The Kyrgyz Republic is ready to support the efforts of the General Assembly and the Security Council aimed at establishing a stable world order, achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and making a meaningful contribution to the collective efforts of the international community to address global challenges and threats.
In that regard, we have put forward our candidacy to become a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the 2027–2028 term. As a country that has never been elected to this key United Nations organ, we count on everyone’s support in the elections scheduled for June 2026 in New York City. If elected, Kyrgyzstan will continue to work towards enhancing the effectiveness and transparency of the Council’s operations and for expanding its composition, taking into account balanced regional representation. It is time to address the lack of representation of African countries in the Council and to correct the historical injustice that 60 Member States, including Kyrgyzstan, have never been elected to the Security Council.
At the Summit of the Future, Member States reaffirmed the importance of the Sustainable Development Goals and the need for their full implementation. Kyrgyzstan remains committed to the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and our achievements confirm our firm intention to achieve the Goals, taking into account national priorities and financial capabilities. The Sustainable Development Goals have been integrated into Kyrgyzstan’s national development strategy until 2040, which creates opportunities for sustainable economic and social development, digitalization, entrepreneurship and the introduction of innovative and environmentally friendly technologies for current and future generations. On 22 July, we adopted a law on the protection of rights and funds of private entrepreneurs and foreign investors. That law lays down the necessary measures for protecting investors in business activities. It also prescribes penalties for State officials who, illegally and unjustly, deny State registration or licenses, restrict business activities or interfere in the activities of investors and private entrepreneurs. Those violations are subject to severe penalties, ranging from two to five years of imprisonment, confiscation of property and substantial fines.
Next year, our country will present its national voluntary review of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. We stand ready to share our experiences, discuss the results and continue striving to be among the 30 countries implementing the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. As a mountainous country, Kyrgyzstan has drawn global attention to the challenges of sustainable development in mountainous regions. Since the 2000s, at our initiative and with the broad support of mountainous countries, the Five Years of Action for the Development of Mountain Regions is being implemented for the 2023–2027 period. I invite all nations to participate actively in that programme and to take part in the second Global Mountain Summit, Bishkek+25, in 2027, where we will take stock of five years of the mountain regions initiative. In addition, we are promoting the initiative to include global dialogue on mountains and climate on the agenda of the annual United Nations Climate Change Conference.
Kyrgyzstan is actively working to protect the snow leopard — a symbol of long-term sustainable development in the region. In December 2023, the snow leopard was recognized as a national symbol of Kyrgyzstan. Together with 11 other countries that form its habitat, we are working to protect this unique animal. In that connection, I am proud to announce that our draft resolution to designate an international day for the snow leopard will be put before the General Assembly. I urge all nations to support the initiative. The inhabitants of mountainous regions face daily challenges, such as water shortages, food insecurity, poverty and lack of access to basic services. Those countries should not be abandoned with their problems. We call on the international community to take active steps to address those issues.
The time has come for the international community to forge a new consensus on the basis of trust and the interests of all nations. In conclusion, I would like to share the following words from the Epic of Manas, which embody the great depth of friendship, unity and solidarity among peoples: Let us join forces and work together akin to one head on one shoulder and one hand in one sleeve. Where there is unity, there is prosperity.
