President Philemon Yang’s chosen theme, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, mirrors the prevailing aspirations of the international community, despite intractable security threats and challenges, as well as uncertainty and a continuously evolving geopolitical landscape.
The current picture of the world is grim. Violent armed conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza, Lebanon, the Sudan, Myanmar and many other parts of the world rage on despite efforts to de-escalate them. Worse, with intensifying geopolitical tensions, any misstep in various flashpoints may trigger a regional or even global war, potentially involving nuclear weapons. Military spending has surged across the world, draining resources that could be used to address multiplying non-traditional threats that no single country can effectively tackle alone, such as climate change, pandemics, food insecurity, technological disruptions, transnational crime and backsliding on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Cambodia cannot emphasize strongly enough the urgent need for all of us to act together to confront those daunting challenges. It is critical that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law remain the backbone of the world order and global cooperation. The use of diplomacy and mediation must be prioritized to resolve conflicts and prevent their escalation. Cambodia believes that sustainable peace can be achieved only through meaningful dialogue based on mutual respect, genuine goodwill, tolerance and a commitment to peaceful coexistence.
Based on those core principles, Cambodia sees great merit in the New Agenda for Peace presented by the Secretary-General and supports the actions laid out in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) for promoting international peace and security. Also based on those principles, Cambodia hopes for a prompt end to the war between Russia and Ukraine through diplomacy and dialogue based on equal respect. We commend all efforts to de-escalate the fighting and all initiatives that seek to end the war through peaceful means and that engage all sides to work toward a lasting peace.
On the Palestine-Israel conflict, Cambodia remains committed to its long-held support for a two-State solution, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions. We believe that this plan is the only way Palestinians and Israelis can heal their prolonged antagonism and live side-by-side peacefully. Cambodia supports the establishment of the State of Palestine and Palestine’s bid to become a full Member of the United Nations. Cambodia condemns all acts of terrorism and calls for a dialogue to stop the ongoing war and the ever-worsening humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
We are deeply concerned over the prospect of an all-out region-wide war in the Middle East, given the latest reports of intensifying fighting in Lebanon. The current rapid escalation of war in that region must stop. Members of the international community must insist that all sides work proactively to seek ways to defuse the very grave situation now.
The crisis in Myanmar remains a serious concern to us. Cambodia, along with other States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), is committed to ASEAN’s five-point consensus as the basis for a peaceful and inclusive solution. We stress the importance of fostering an environment conducive to dialogue and to ceasefire negotiations. We also emphasize the need for humanitarian relief and for a Myanmar-owned and Myanmar-led political process aimed at lasting peace and reconciliation. ASEAN, on the strength of its diversity, should continue to lead the effort to help Myanmar restore normalcy, under Laos’s chairmanship. On the other hand, Cambodia welcomes the appointment of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar and looks forward to her working closely with the ASEAN Chair’s own Special Envoy on Myanmar.
As a final point, Cambodia opposes unilateral coercive measures. They have a detrimental impact on ordinary citizens in targeted nations. Sanctions and economic blockades disproportionately harm the most vulnerable and impede achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Let me talk now about leaving no one behind. Given Cambodia’s own dark past, we believe that peace is the key prerequisite for development, especially development that is sustainable and inclusive. Cambodia sees the attainment of sustainable development and human dignity for every individual as an absolute necessity. Cambodia’s current long-term development strategy, called the Pentagonal Strategy, is aimed at building Cambodia into a vibrant and just society that thrives on lasting peace, political stability, good governance and respect for the rule of law. With economic growth projected to reach 6 per cent in 2024, Cambodia is on track to further reduce poverty to below 10 per cent by 2028. It is also on track to gain upper middle-income status by 2030 and high-income status by 2050. How do we get there?
First, Cambodia will give top priority to building its human capital to meet the demands of the digital age. We will invest more in enhancing quality education, science and technology, training in technical skills, health and well-being, and food security and equal social protection, with special attention to women, girls and the marginalized.
Secondly, we will deepen economic diversification by developing key sectors, such as transportation and energy, and we will promote new drivers for economic growth and job creation. The construction of the Funan Techo Canal, inaugurated last month, will connect our capital, Phnom Penh, to the Gulf of Thailand. It will be a game-changer for sustainable growth in Cambodia and for improving the livelihood of our people.
Thirdly, to enhance efficiency, inclusion and access to public services, Cambodia will accelerate the development of e-Government and of a digital economy and society. I am happy to note our significant advances in financial inclusion, with the introduction of an interoperable digital payment system by the central bank, using a blockchain technology called Bakong.
Fourthly, we take a whole-of-society approach to development that seeks to enhance resilience, sustainability and inclusion by promoting gender equality, a green and circular economy and environmental protection.
After years on the list of least developed countries (LDCs), Cambodia looks forward to its expected graduation from LDC status by 2029. Reaching that milestone will reflect our impressive progress on our journey of revival and development.
Cambodia values multilateralism, the rules-based international order, the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Those are indispensable for consensus-building and mobilizing concerted actions, and we worry that confidence in the fairness and effectiveness of multilateralism is eroding. Conflicts are multiplying. Geopolitical competition is intensifying. Adherence to international regimes is declining on many fronts: arms control, trade, the environment and human rights.
It is time that Member States reaffirmed their commitment to the global system and rebuilt trust in it. The United Nations, with its unparalleled convening power, has long been the driving force in addressing global challenges and promoting cooperation among States. But unprecedented challenges today are testing the limits of the Organization. We urgently need to revitalize the United Nations and make it more robust and more proactive.
Cambodia fully supports the Secretary-General’s reform agenda, including the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform. The Security Council needs to be tailored to the twenty-first century and, if it is to be effective for today’s tasks, its composition must be more fairly representative. As the Secretary-General has rightly stated, “We cannot create a future fit for our grandchildren with systems built for our grandparents”.
Cambodia also fully supports the Secretary-General’s call for bold climate actions. To achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, as it has pledged to do, Cambodia has launched many measures, including raising the current 62 per cent renewable energy share to at least 70 per cent by 2030, by promoting reforestation and by providing incentives to green-investment projects. Cambodia actively participates in global climate negotiations, and it looks forward to the upcoming twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Baku.
Cambodia also fully supports the work of the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, held in July under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council. We welcome the adoption of the Ministerial Declaration on SDGs. We reaffirm our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We endorse efforts to bridge the SDG financing gap, reform the global financial system and strengthen multilevel governance.
As all of us together look to the future, it should seem evident that no nation can achieve those ambitious goals alone. Global challenges demand global solutions. Cambodia is committed to strengthening international cooperation, sharing knowledge and best practices, and working collaboratively with our global partners. By acting together, all of us here can create a world where peace, sustainable development and human dignity are a reality for all our peoples.
Cambodia commends the success of the Summit of the Future and affirms our steadfast commitment to the letter and the spirit of the Pact for the Future, to international peace and security, to turbocharging SDGs and to modernizing multilateral institutions.
Cambodia is proud to play a significant role in global peacekeeping. Since 2006, we have sent over 9,000 of our people — including over 800 women — to serve in 11 United Nations missions. We are honoured to present our candidacy for membership of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for 2025-2026. We seek Members’ support for our bid. Cambodia supports relevant adjustments and reforms to increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and promote the women and peace and security agenda and the youth, peace and security agenda.
Cambodia is also honoured to be hosting the fifth Review Conference of the States Parties to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, also known as the Ottawa Convention, in November in Siem Reap. That landmark event will serve as a platform for renewed global solidarity in the pursuit of a world free from the scourge of anti-personnel mines. We extend a warm invitation to all Member States to join us for that important gathering.
In conclusion, Cambodia reaffirms its steadfast commitment to working hand-in-hand with the United Nations and all Member States to advance the noble goals of peace, sustainable development and human dignity. Cambodia stands ready to contribute our unique experience, resources and unwavering determination to that endeavour. For Cambodia, sustainable and inclusive development means that no one and no place is left behind.
