I am happy to greet the General Assembly on behalf of the President, the Government and the people of the Republic of Kiribati.
At the outset, I wish to join other delegations in congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang and the Government and the people of Cameroon on Mr. Yang’s election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and to assure him of Kiribati’s full support and cooperation as he steers our work over the next 12 months.
We also acknowledge with gratitude the efforts and work of the outgoing President, Mr. Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, as well as his leadership for the past year.
It is with immense pride and a deep sense of responsibility that Kiribati stands before the Assembly, marking 25 years of our membership of the United Nations. A quarter-century ago, Kiribati joined this body and became the 186th Member of the United Nations family, believing that the challenges we face as a small island nation are inextricably linked to the fate of the global community. As we celebrate that milestone, we honour the path we have walked with our global partners and reaffirm our commitment to the core principles of the United Nations: peace, justice, human rights, responsibility, respect and sustainable development.
The theme of “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations” could not be more relevant as global conflicts escalates, causing widespread destruction, displacing people and leaving millions neglected and marginalized. The theme reminds us that, despite the ongoing crises, we must stand firmly together as responsible leaders of the 193 Member nations of this greatest multinational Organization and recommit ourselves to doing together whatever is necessary to get the world back on the path of peace, progress and prosperity. What we are witnessing in the world today and have witnessed for the past 79 years suggests that the founding fathers’ aspiration to lasting peace is far from being realized. The theme is therefore a timely reminder not to lose hope over the heartbreaking scenes before us but to re-energize our unity, solidarity and collective determination to overcome the forces that stand against the multilateralism that our United Nations family embodies.
That is why Kiribati reaffirms the critical importance of reinvigorating multilateralism. The United Nations must remain the central platform for collective global action, as no single nation can address the complexities of today’s challenges on its own, be they pandemics, terrorism, conflict, human trafficking or climate change, to name a few. It cannot be disputed that the United Nations, which was created in 1945 by the 51 founding Members to restore and maintain world peace and security out of the ashes and devastation of the Second World War, has now become the largest international Organization on Earth dealing with all aspects of human livelihood and well-being, to such an extent that its core function of maintaining world peace and improving living standards has been greatly thwarted. That is further exacerbated by the lack of unity and solidarity among Member States, coupled with the persistent lack of respect for the Charter of the United Nations and for the rights and sovereignty of nations under the Charter. The apparent lack of unity and solidarity within the membership of this family is very much evident in the inability of Members to stand united on issues of common concern, the increasing polarization of global issues and the proliferation of exclusive groupings, which tends to breed more disunity and distrust among Members.
The success or failure of the United Nations in its core mission to achieve peace, progress and prosperity depends not only on the dedication, commitment and persistence of its leadership and membership but also on the quality of the teamwork between the two. The theme is a reminder of the need to gauge the performance of the United Nations against its core mission of maintaining world peace, improving living standards and promoting human rights and freedoms. In that vein, our collective deliberations at the seventy-ninth session must shape a more effective path for the United Nations, ensuring that it meets the pressing challenges of our time and serves all nations equitably. Considering the significant disparity between the United Nations intended mission and its actual outcomes, an in-depth analysis is needed to explore why the Organization has not been successful in preventing and resolving conflicts. It is important that the root causes of those failures be identified and addressed.
Equally important is the need to stress the crucial role of the Secretary-General, jointly with the five permanent members of the Security Council, in putting a stop to ongoing conflicts and preventing new ones from erupting. In order to make the United Nations fit to deal effectively with new and complex challenges confronting humankind at this time, Kiribati calls for an overdue reform of the Security Council to ensure that it reflects the realities of today’s world. We believe that the permanent membership of the Council should be expanded to make it more inclusive and representative, including by allocating seats to the small island developing States (SIDS) and other vulnerable countries so as to ensure that the perspectives and needs of the most vulnerable nations are heard and addressed.
My country firmly believes that Members’ respect for the United Nations Charter and for each other’s rights and sovereignty is key to the peace of the world and to the efficient and effective functioning of the United Nations multilateralism. It is therefore of paramount importance that each one of us recommit ourselves now to fully respecting the Charter and each other’s rights and sovereignty. Of equal importance is a renewal of faith and trust in each other as Members of the United Nations family.
Peacekeeping remains a cornerstone of international cooperation for maintaining global security and stability. Kiribati is grateful to have contributed to that effort by deploying police personnel to support the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Kiribati remains steadfast in its belief that global peace can be achieved only through collective action and we will continue to play our part in that regard.
Kiribati firmly believes that a country without peace, as now seen in the case of countries that are currently being devastated by wars and conflicts, cannot undertake any meaningful development while its people are deprived of enjoying a normal way of life and forced to live in refugee camps or as homeless people surviving through charity and humanitarian donations. People living in such dire conditions have no way of becoming economically productive in order to feel a sense of human pride and dignity and cannot voluntarily free themselves from such a predicament until the conflict has been resolved, peace has been restored, and life has returned to normal. In other words, development and human dignity are not achievable without peace. Peace must be achieved first.
Kiribati’s unwavering commitment to global peace internationals deeply rooted in its tragic history with nuclear weapons. As a nation that has experienced the harsh, destructive and long-lasting consequences of nuclear testing, Kiribati remains steadfast in our support for the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, a landmark agreement that represents a collective effort to eliminate the threat of nuclear weapons from our world through complete nuclear disarmament, and we stand in solidarity with other States in advocating for a world free of nuclear weapons.
Kiribati recently launched its first-ever foreign policy during its forty-fifth National Day celebration on 12 July. That landmark document principally seeks to enhance the policy objectives of the core pillars of the Kiribati 20-Year Vision (KV20). It captures the ways forward on how we seek to engage effectively and strategically with our partners in areas of shared and mutual interest. It seeks to develop our nation and people while protecting our right to self-determination over our huge ocean and air space.
Allow me at this juncture to highlight Kiribati’s views and perspectives on some pertinent issues for small islands, such as climate change and sea level rise, the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), marine conservation and protection, the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) and the crucial link between peace, sustainable development, human dignity and the concept of leaving no one behind, as highlighted in the theme.
Kiribati’s designation as a least developed country (LDC) reflects not only our economic challenges but also our acute vulnerability to climate change. Kiribati’s geographical isolation from major world markets coupled with the volatility of global commodity prices and the increasing frequency of extreme weather patterns, exacerbates our development challenges. The high cost of imports, limited export opportunities and reliance on fluctuating external markets further strain our efforts to achieve sustainable growth and development. Our graduation status from the LDC category, which has been deferred to a later date, remains at the back of our minds, given what it would mean for us in the future, given those unprecedented challenges. It is for that reason, among others, that we recognize the multidimensional vulnerability index potential as a more fitting measure of vulnerability for all developing States.
We believe that humankind must be well informed that the riches and resources of the planet are finite and must not be overexploited to the extent that the planet’s health and wealth are compromised, as is now evident in the climate crisis caused by the overexploitation of the planet’s resources during the past century of industrialization. While international dialogue on climate change has been extensive, Kiribati urges that we move beyond words to concrete actions. The commitments made in international forums, including the Conferences of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, must translate into tangible results on the ground. As we continue to advocate for mitigation, it is clear that adaptation and resilience-building are critical for low-lying atoll nations like Kiribati. Coastal protection remains a priority for Kiribati, and while adaptative measures such as the planting of mangroves and the demarcating of seagrass continue, there is a dire need for interventions in hard infrastructure, such as resilient seawalls.
Climate change is undeniably the driving force behind sea level rise. Kiribati continues to grapple with the challenges posed by sea level rise, which endangers our land, agriculture and way of life. The Alliance of Small Island States Leaders Declaration on Sea Level Rise and Statehood encourages our dedication to building resilience against climate impacts and emphasizes the urgent need for global action. The United Nations recognition of the profound impacts of climate change and sea level rise, through the establishment of a high-level platform to address sea level rise at this session, is a notable and welcome step. It reflects the urgency of addressing climate change and its devastating consequences on vulnerable communities worldwide. In line with our commitment to the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, we strongly advocate for global climate action, including maintaining the 1.5°C goal and addressing sea level rise as essential to safeguarding the livelihoods, identity, sovereignty and security of Pacific island communities, especially low-lying atolls, which are only two or three metres above sea level.
As we continue our journey towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, Kiribati has localized the SDGs in a 20-year development road map, the KV20, with its primary aim of making Kiribati a healthy, wealthy and most peaceful nation by 2036. That localization effort ensures that the SDGs are not merely theoretical goals but are embedded in our national policies projects and initiatives. Sustainable development is crucial to the long-term resilience and prosperity of Kiribati and other small island developing States (SIDS). However, the realization of those goals requires enhanced capacity development, technology transfer and stronger data support systems to better meet the unique and special circumstances of vulnerable countries.
Kiribati also commits and looks forward to the implementation of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS (ABAS), focusing on several key areas aimed at promoting sustainable development and resilience and addressing the unique challenges faced by small island developing States, such as climate change resilience, sustainable economic development, access to financing and biodiversity conservation, to name a few. ABAS reflects the need for tailored solutions that recognize the unique circumstances of SIDS while promoting sustainable development and resilience against external shocks.
Fisheries continue to hold prominence as a priority sector within our Kiribati 20-Year Vision, given that ocean resources contribute significantly to Kiribati’s economy. Kiribati’s huge reliance on its tuna fishing licence revenue, which finances about 70 per cent of the Government’s annual budget for expenditures, makes it mandatory for the Government to take special care of the health of the marine environment, as evidenced in its adoption of the marine spatial planning of the entire 3.5 million square kilometres of its tuna-rich ocean. In order to promote public awareness and participation in marine protection and conservation, a number of programmes have been launched in some villages and communities in which people are encouraged to make village-based rules for protecting fisheries in their areas against over exploitation and punishing offenders in accordance with well-accepted cultural practices.
However, with our limited capacity in monitoring and surveilling our large economic exclusive zone, we are highly susceptible to illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing expeditions. Considering our heavy reliance on our fisheries for livelihood and revenue, Kiribati remains deeply concerned about the ongoing challenge of IUU fishing, which undermines not only our national effort to sustainably manage marine resources but also global progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. IUU fishing significantly impacts our national economy by depleting fish stocks, undermining sustainable fishing practices and reducing revenue for local fisheries. That threatens economic stability and the livelihoods of our people dependent on fishing. We acknowledge the assistance of our partners in addressing that gap and in providing surveillance support. Kiribati calls upon the international community to strengthen cooperation and action to combat IUU fishing, ensuring that sustainable fisheries management becomes a reality for all nations, especially those most vulnerable to its impacts. Kiribati is acutely aware of the profound significance of the ocean to our livelihoods, culture and environment. That is why we have invested great effort in the preservation and protection of our marine environment.
Kiribati applauds the Secretary-General for his great initiative in bringing the whole world together to re-energize the United Nations as it approaches its eightieth year anniversary so that it remains relevant and vital to the peace, progress and prosperity of humankind in the future. The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) offers an essential road map for strengthening global cooperation on key issues, including climate change, digital transformation and peacebuilding. We fully support the development of the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I), which will help bridge the digital divide and ensure that small island developing States like Kiribati are not left behind in the digital age. It is vital that the international community take bold steps to strengthen global governance mechanisms, fostering inclusive multilateralism that benefits all countries, particularly the most vulnerable. We believe that the successes of those initiatives will be key to achieving sustainable development, peace and security for future generations.
I express our hope for the future. Kiribati firmly believes that, together, we can unite in action and commitment, ensuring that no country is left behind in our pursuit of a more sustainable world where peace, sustainable development and human dignity are advanced for present and future generations. Let us make the seventy-ninth session a time to renew our unity, solidarity and togetherness for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations. We believe that, together, we can make it and that, together, we can do it.
