I should like to extend my congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
Let me also pay tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres for his dedication to global peace and prosperity.
The year 2024 has, sadly, earned the distinction of being the most conflict-ridden year since the Second World War. Across the globe, from Ukraine to the Middle East, conflict and division have torn at the fabric of human dignity. Two billion people, or roughly one in four, reside in conflict zones. Some 310 million people require humanitarian assistance worldwide and more than 120 million, or one in 70, are refugees. Meanwhile, records suggest that we are brushing dangerously close to the critical threshold of 1.5°C. Most worrisome of all, the international community seems to be losing the sense of what those numbers really stand for: real lives disrupted, families displaced, futures lost and a planetary crisis looming. As the war of aggression against Ukraine drags on into its third year and as seemingly intractable challenges mount with no end in sight, cynicism and powerlessness are hardening in some quarters. There is a growing belief that multilateralism is ineffective and the United Nations is no longer relevant.
But I stand before the General Assembly today to affirm that this is not true. My nation’s very existence as a free, democratic and prosperous country is proof that the United Nations in action works. It was the first-ever United Nations-led coalition that defended freedom and democracy in the Republic of Korea, ravaged by war the in early 1950s. Our journey from devastation to democracy and prosperity was made possible by the continued support of the international community, particularly through United Nations agencies and programmes. The story of the Republic of Korea provides the antidote against paralysing defeatism. It is a story of what we can achieve when good men and women choose to act together — the concrete evidence that the multilateral system can make a real difference. If global challenges are mounting, then we must double down on multilateralism. We need more United Nations in action, not less.
That is why I applaud the timely and proactive initiative of Secretary-General António Guterres to convene the Summit of the Future this year. As we prepare to mark the eightieth session of the General Assembly next year, we must ask ourselves what role the United Nations role will play in the decades to come. Where do we see ourselves in the ninetieth and hundredth session of the General Assembly? The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) is the culmination of all our soul-searching at the Summit of the Future. It galvanizes our resolve to act not just for the present but for future generations as well. Now the onus is on each and every United Nations Members to fulfil its commitments in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Earlier, I mentioned that the United Nations in action works, but we must not forget that the United Nations in action actually means United Nations Members in action. Under the foreign policy of vision of President Yoon Suk Yeol, the Republic of Korea seeks to be a global pivot State, recognizing both its indebtedness to the multilateral systems and its growing ability to be their champion. The Republic of Korea is committed to doing its part as a United Nations Member by serving the three functions of facilitator, supporter and initiator.
First, in global efforts to build sustainable peace, the Republic of Korea will act as a facilitator. Peace is not merely the absence of conflict; it is the sustainable presence of security and opportunity. The Republic of Korea understands that deeply, having endured the trials of war and division. Today the Republic of Korea is one of the core contributors to United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts around the world. Its troops and experts serve in some of the world’s most volatile regions, providing not just security but hope.
To ensure that peace is durable, however, it is important to go beyond the individual efforts of contributing countries. The Republic of Korea advocates strengthening the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, with the Peacebuilding Commission at its core, fulfilling its unique mandate to bridge all three pillars of the United Nations in order to bring greater coherence and a more integrated approach. We will actively participate in the peacebuilding architecture review next year, with a focus on how to strengthen the humanitarian development and peace nexus. We also align our humanitarian aid and development cooperation programmes with the United Nations activities to promote peace and security around the world and collaborate with the United Nations in identifying multifaceted challenges and addressing root causes in a coherent and holistic manner.
At the heart of our mission as a facilitator is our role as an elected member of the Security Council for the 2024-2025 term. Our focus is on peacekeeping and peacebuilding, advancing the women and peace and security agenda and addressing the complex relationship between climate and security. However, we must also face the dysfunctions that have hampered, the Council’s effectiveness. It is increasingly difficult to justify the current structure when a permanent member continues its war of aggression on its neighbour, challenging the fundamental tenets of the Charter of the United Nations it is tasked with upholding. The misuse of its right of the veto is deadlocking important and urgent work.
As we seek practical solutions by actively building common ground among the diverse views of the Council members, we will also work with all United Nations Member States to achieve a comprehensive Security Council reform in the intergovernmental negotiations. Expanding the elected membership through equitable geographical distribution and regular elections will contribute to making more democratic, effective, transparent, representative and accountable Council. The compromise proposal of longer-term, re-electable seats deserves due attention in that regard.
The Republic of Korea will also actively address the surging demand for humanitarian aid in the midst of ongoing conflict. This year, the Republic of Korea has committed $200 million in humanitarian aid to Ukraine, and we also plan to provide $100 million to tackle humanitarian crises by this year’s end, including $30 million for civilians affected by the ongoing Israel-Hamas conflict. Sadly, conflict in the Middle East is now being further escalated, especially along the Israel-Lebanon border. The Republic Korea joins the United States, France and many others in urging the parties to pause their fighting and instead give diplomacy a chance to succeed.
Secondly, the Republic of Korea will play a role as a supporter of the global South in its efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and take climate actions. As the first country to transition from recipient to donor nation, we firmly believe that we can and should be the tide that lifts other boats. That philosophy underpins our approach to official development assistance (ODA), which has grown by 30 per cent this year from last year and quadrupled since 2010. With only six years left to meet the SDGs and only 17 per cent of the Goals on track, we also wish to be smart about how our ODA is put to use, regardless of how fast-growing it is. Our initiative to serve as a green leader through our green ODA demonstrates our commitment to tackling the nexus of climate change and the SDGs. Recently, the Republic of Korea committed an additional $300 million to the Green Climate Fund and $7 million to the Loss and Damage Fund and has plans to continue expanding its green ODA.
But financial support is only part of the equation. We are buttressing our funding with intangible support by sharing our unique development know-how and building wider and more sustained partnerships. The inaugural Korea-Pacific Islands Summit, held last year, as well as the first-ever Korea-Africa Summit, held in June this year, were landmark events that highlighted our commitment to deepening mutually enriching partnerships with those regions. At the June Korea-Africa Summit, we pledged to increase our ODA to Africa up to $10 billion by 2030 and to collaboratively address global challenges such as climate change, food insecurity and supply chain disruptions. We put a particular focus on empowering the youth of Africa, the youngest continent in the world, to drive sustainable development through such initiatives as Tech for Africa. Next year, we plan to organize the inaugural Korea-Central Asia summit, where sustainable development will again take centre stage. All of this would only be a half measure without Korea’s own green transition. We will remain fully committed to carbon-free energy initiatives.
Thirdly, the Republic of Korea will act as an initiator in global efforts to install new norms and governance for human dignity and well-being. The exponential growth of technology, particularly in the field of artificial intelligence (AI), has not only opened new frontiers, but also poses potential risks to human rights and dignity. Meeting such a new challenge requires new norms and governance fit for our time. To that end, my President, standing in this very Hall last year (see A/78/ PV.6) pledged to lead the global discussions on AI governance, and we have since spearheaded efforts to establish frameworks that ensure AI is developed and used in service of humankind. The Seoul Declaration for safe, innovative and inclusive AI, adopted at the AI Seoul Summit in May, marked a significant milestone in building the norms for civilian AI. The adoption of the Blueprint for Action at the second Summit on Responsible AI in the Military Domain, held earlier this month in Seoul, further laid the groundwork for norms for the military use of AI.
We are also dedicated to addressing cyberthreats and promoting open, free and safe cyberspace that respects human rights. Leveraging its expertise in cybersecurity, the Republic of Korea has actively participated in global efforts to establish comprehensive norms, including the United Nations Convention against Cybercrime. Our work extends to the Security Council, where, as an elected member, the Republic of Korea is helping to lay a solid foundation for the Council’s effective and agile response to cybersecurity issues.
Another area of concern is plastic pollution, a global crisis that threatens both ecosystems and human health. The Republic of Korea will host the fifth and last session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee on Plastic Pollution in Busan in November, where we hope to work with United Nations Members to reach a binding agreement to end that form of pollution.
The heartbreaking tragedy is that just miles from Seoul, we find cynicism at its bleakest. North Korea continues to pose threats to peace and security on the Korean peninsula and beyond with its ongoing development of nuclear and missile capabilities, as shown by the recent disclosure of uranium enrichment facilities, as well as provocations that have stooped to despicable levels, such as sending trash balloons into the South. Moreover, North Korea has been engaged in military cooperation with Russia, providing it with missiles and vast amounts of ammunition. It is indeed deplorable that Russia, a permanent member of the Security Council and one of the founding States of the non-proliferation regime, is engaging in an illegal arms trade with North Korea and, in April (see S/PV.9591), vetoed the extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), which had been functioning effectively for the past 15 years.
The heart of the matter is that North Korea’s nuclear missile programmes and egregious human rights abuses are two sides of the same coin. North Korea is able to develop those weapons of mass destruction with impunity only by repressing the human rights of its people and diverting scarce resources from its starving populace. What Pyongyang offers is not a vision, but a cold and self-serving calculus that only sees twin deficits persisting indefinitely — a deficit of peace on the peninsula and a deficit of freedom in North Korea.
The 15 August unification doctrine unveiled by President Yoon Suk Yeol last month presents a vision of a unified Korean peninsula that is free, peaceful and prosperous. Recognizing that achieving sustainable peace is an unfinished task on the peninsula, we firmly believe that the road to peace runs through the expansion of freedom and through the unification of the Korean peninsula. Such peace would contribute to global peace and security. Under that vision, the freedom that has underpinned the Republic of Korea’s independence, growth and prosperity will at last be fully unlocked in the North, restoring the human rights of each and every Korean. Achieving the vision will require the international community to advocate the freedom and human rights of North Koreans who have no voice. The Republic Korea is committed to working together with the international community to steer North Korea towards making the right decisions.
Nearly 75 years ago, the founders of the United Nations stood together, bound by faith in multilateralism, to defend freedom and sovereignty and uphold the United Nations Charter. As we approach the eightieth session of the General Assembly next year, we must recommit ourselves to the principles that brought us together. Multilateralism is not an outdated concept; it is the only path forward. To stand idle in the face of today’s challenges would be to abandon both the vulnerable today and the generation of tomorrow.
