At the outset, I would like to extend the greetings of His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait, Sheikh Meshal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah and the best wishes of His Highness for the success of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly.
I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang and his country on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I am confident that his vast experience in international affairs will enable him to lead its work with wisdom and leadership. His vision of “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere” is of great importance and urgent necessity in today’s world.
I would also like to commend the efforts of his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, during his presidency at the previous session. I highly appreciate the wise leadership and fruitful endeavours of the Secretary-General, which are evident in the light of accelerating international changes. His efforts have been guided by his determination to fulfil the mission of the United Nations, adhering to the principles of its Charter, which are based on the preservation of international peace and security, through ever accelerating preparations to meet the world’s challenges and by creating innovative mechanisms founded on the protection of human rights and dignity and the promotion of justice and international law.
Maintaining the effectiveness and productivity of the Organization is the responsibility of the Member States and the international community in facing all challenges. The Summit of the Future was held a few days ago, mirroring the reality of today’s world. The Summit shed light on the grave challenges that require a moment of reflection and a genuine and serious will to reform our institutions, most notably the Security Council and international financial institutions.
History is replete with milestones. We would not want the Summit of the Future to be a global milestone that does not enjoy optimal investment. The Secretary-General has worked tenaciously, which is highly commendable, and encouraged us to stop and reflect together on the path of our joint multilateral action. He has been committed to bringing together the leaders of Member States to highlight the fact that the threats we face are confronting all of us and that no country is immune to their repercussions. There is no way forward other than in cooperation towards our joint objectives.
We cannot speak of renewing international solidarity without the genuine international political will for reform, especially reform of the Security Council and the mechanisms of international action that will enable us to keep abreast of global developments and repel any threats to the security and stability of our world. Unfortunately, that will remains lacking. We have seen very clearly that there can be no political will without an environment of trust and effective participation. We believe that the Security Council bears the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. Decision-making in the Security Council must be based on the principle of democracy and the equitable representation of all Member States. The Security Council must be able to respond to a world that is completely different to that of 1945. We need a Security Council that is inclusive, transparent, efficient, effective, democratic and accountable.
Technological innovations, artificial intelligence and social media are increasingly being used for incitement, terrorist recruitment and spreading hate speech, misinformation and disinformation, with adverse effects on cybersecurity. We must give due attention to that issue. Many young people have fallen victim to those negative practices. All of this proves that confronting that scourge requires international cooperation.
To fulfil the aspirations and hopes of our peoples to secure a brighter future, we need accountability. It is not reasonable to expect such a bright future when those who violate the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law and international humanitarian law are not held accountable. There can be no justice or equality so long as double standards prevail. There will be no bright future unless everyone is fully committed to the principles and values of the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
This year, we are celebrating the forty-third anniversary of the establishment of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC). Throughout its blessed journey over the past four decades, it has proven to be a pillar of stability and prosperity in our region. In that context, I convey our deepest appreciation to the brotherly State of Qatar for its efforts as current Chair of the GCC to enhance the Council’s work at the bilateral and multilateral levels.
In December, the State of Kuwait will assume the chairmanship of the GCC. We reiterate our firm commitment to pursuing that blessed journey and to enhancing strategic partnerships with regional and international organizations. We are committed to achieving the noble goals to which we all aspire. The GCC has always been and will remain a voice of wisdom and moderation and a beacon for constructive dialogue in a region fraught with challenges and where change is rapid.
The State of Kuwait looks forward to the regional and international events to be hosted by the GCC. In that context, we congratulate once again our brethren in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on being selected to host Expo 2030 and the 2034 Fédération Internationale de Football Association World Cup. The State of Kuwait will spare no effort to contribute to the success of those events in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The State of Kuwait believes in the principle of good-neighbourliness. For some two decades now, we have been committed to working closely with the brotherly Republic of Iraq and helping it to reclaim its rightful place in the regional and international arenas and to fulfil the hopes and aspirations of its people. We call on the brotherly Republic of Iraq to take concrete, resolute and urgent action to settle all outstanding files between our two countries, most notably the demarcation of the maritime border beyond marker 162, in accordance with international laws and conventions. We also call for the settlement of the file on Kuwaiti prisoners, missing persons and Kuwaiti property, including the National Archives, with the United Nations and specifically the Security Council following the progress on that file.
We call upon our brethren in Iraq to respect bilateral security and technical agreements on the Khor Abdullah maritime corridor. Those agreements ensure environmental protection, regulate navigation and contribute to combating terrorism and illicit trafficking in arms, drugs and persons. Continuous dialogue is important to lay the foundation for promising relations and a bright future based on understanding and mutual respect between our two brotherly nations.
The whole world is witnessing practices that are not acceptable to any religion, law or human nature. The whole world has been witness to the dangerous escalation of military operations by the Israeli occupation forces against our Palestinian brethren in the Gaza Strip and the other occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem and the West Bank. Our Palestinian brethren are subjected to collective punishment. Ongoing air strikes are targeting defenceless civilians, claiming the lives of tens of thousands of innocent children, men and women, amounting to more than 41,000 martyrs. The occupying forces persist in targeting the facilities of international organizations and critical infrastructure and in forcibly displacing the residents of Gaza. Peace in our region will not be achieved until the independent State of Palestine is established, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the borders of 4 June 1967, pursuant to international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The State of Kuwait welcomes the recognition of the State of Palestine by a number of countries over the past few months. We call on other countries to follow suit and take similar steps. The State of Kuwait will remain supportive of Palestinian rights and the Palestinian people. We were proud to have provided oral and written submissions to the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences arising from violations by the occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Alongside the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the Republic of Slovenia and 120 other United Nations Member States, we were proud to sign the shared commitments document to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). What has befallen UNRWA is further proof that the other side has no serious desire to achieve genuine peace.
The brotherly Sudan is witnessing unfortunate events as a result of armed clashes. That is a cause for significant concern. We call for an immediate cessation of hostilities, a resumption of dialogue and a return to the peaceful political track in order to maintain the security, stability and territorial integrity of the Sudan. We support all ongoing regional and international initiatives to reach a political solution that will end the crisis, provide the necessary protection to civilians and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid. It is important to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan.
Regarding the situation in the brotherly State of Yemen, the State of Kuwait reiterates its support for United Nations efforts, through the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to reactivate the political process and reach a comprehensive settlement in accordance with the three agreed terms of reference to maintain the stability, security and territorial integrity of Yemen. We commend the efforts made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman to revive the political process and reach a comprehensive and lasting solution in Yemen. We express our concern over the developments in the Red Sea. It is important to ensure the safety of maritime navigation pursuant to international law and the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Regarding the situation in Syria, the State of Kuwait believes that it is necessary to step up efforts to reach a political solution that is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions, most notably resolution 2254 (2015). Such a solution must fulfil the aspirations of the Syrian people to security and stability and preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
Regarding the situation in Lebanon, the State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms the airstrikes and military operations launched by Israeli occupation forces against the brotherly Republic of Lebanon. Those operations have claimed the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians who had nothing to do with the dangerous escalation of the Israeli aggression, which is expanding day after day, in flagrant violation of all norms and international law, including international humanitarian law. We have always warned against that aggression and its repercussions on the countries of the region and neighbouring countries. We also condemn violations by the Israeli occupation forces of Lebanese sovereignty and any attempt to drag Lebanon into the ongoing conflict in the region. The Israeli occupation forces ignore international calls and relevant Security Council resolutions. We call for the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
We are following with great concern the latest developments in the brotherly country of Libya. We call for reason and wisdom to prevail and for political dialogue to settle disputes, in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions, maintain the stability, sovereignty and security of Libya and fulfil the aspirations of the Libyan people to development and prosperity.
At the regional level, we believe in strengthening good-neighbourly relations, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to take serious steps to build trust and to engage in dialogue based on respect for other countries and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Through the Kuwait Vision 2035, we are focused on responding to international financial and economic indicators in order to predict opportunities and make the State of Kuwait a financial, commercial and cultural hub that responds to regional international developments. Foreign policy plays an important role in that expanded development process. Our diplomacy relies on digitalization to move from traditional frameworks so as to ensure that our diplomacy responds continuously to evolving developments on the global landscape. Our actions are based on a proactive approach, the result of an enduring legacy of providing relief and humanitarian assistance bequeathed to us by our forefathers.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait is committed to multilateral actions and the Charter of the United Nations in order to ensure global governance that is strong enough to fulfil the noble mission of the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security and serving humankind as a whole. The State of Kuwait looks forward to cooperating with brotherly and friendly countries to fulfil the aspirations of all peoples so that they can live in a prosperous world where peace and security prevail.
