At the outset, I would like to express my sincere congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I have full confidence that, with his extensive diplomatic experience and wisdom, he will successfully lead the Assembly under the theme of “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, which is of the utmost importance and relevance to the current global situation.
In the same vein, I commend Mr. Denis Francis for his successful conduct of his tenure as the President of the General Assembly.
Today the international community is facing multifaceted challenges across various regions, such as geopolitical tensions, armed conflicts, economic and financial crises, ever more frequent and devastating natural disasters resulting from climate change, rising poverty and widespread social unrest worldwide, among others. Those remain real threats to international peace, stability and security and obstacles to the national development efforts of Member States, as well as to the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), leaving many countries that have yet to fully recover from the impacts of the coronavirus disease with exacerbated economic and financial difficulties. Against that backdrop, I have seen Member States strive to enhance cooperation through multilateral frameworks and regional mechanisms to jointly address pressing issues, seeking to create an environment conducive to the maintenance of peace, which is the most fundamental condition for sustainable development.
However, the challenges that we are facing are much more fragile, could have more dire consequences and could potentially reshape the current and future international peace and security landscape, especially geopolitical tensions that are becoming more confrontational and widening divisions, all of which — including the prolonged conflicts in Gaza, Ukraine and many countries in Africa — require immediate attention.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is deeply concerned about the ongoing armed conflict that is threatening to spill across the entire Middle East region, which would exacerbate the humanitarian crisis for innocent civilians. We therefore maintain our consistent support for all international efforts aimed at achieving a permanent ceasefire and the cessation of all violence in Gaza and adjacent areas as the fundamental condition for safe and unhindered humanitarian access to the people and for the early launch of negotiations on a peace agreement. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic reiterates its support for the two-State solution for the Palestinian issue, whereby Palestine and Israel would coexist in peace, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, and calls for respect for the inalienable and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and the establishment of the conditions necessary for Palestine to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
Many countries all over the world, including the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, have experienced and suffered first-hand the consequences of war and the resolution of disputes by force, which directly endanger peace and security, with unpredictable loss of innocent lives. As such, the only way to resolve disputes at all levels, with a view towards sustainable peace, is to begin by building mutual trust and engaging in diplomatic negotiations based on respect for sovereignty and adherence to the fundamental principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations .
I am of the view that the international community must rise to its required responsibility and political commitment, leading to tangible results based on international principles, in addressing various current issues and emerging challenges in the future. Simultaneously, we must further enhance our development cooperation and global partnership, ensuring the concrete implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, together with the outcomes of the Summit of the Future that world leaders recently endorsed, based on the promotion of multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core, in order to respond in an adequate and timely manner to the needs of the international community.
It is my view that the application of unilateral coercive measures is against the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law. Such measures have severely and disproportionately affected innocent people and obstructed development progress in many countries. In that regard, we reiterate our unwavering support, in line with the calls of the international community, for an end to the economic embargo against Cuba, its removal from the list of State sponsors of terrorism and the lifting of all unilateral coercive measures against any sovereign State.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has the honour to assume the chairmanship of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 2024 for the third time, under the theme “ASEAN: Enhancing Connectivity and Resilience”, aimed at building ASEAN into a more connected and resilient community through the implementation of its 2024 priorities and initiatives. The theme is reflective of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic’s national policy and objective to transform itself from being a landlocked country into a regional connectivity hub. The theme is also in line with ASEAN’s common goal of building a more connected, integrated and resilient region that is able to respond in an effective and timely manner to emerging challenges amid complex and rapidly changing regional and global landscapes, thereby contributing to the common global cause of maintaining peace, stability and security, as well as sustainable development in the region and the world.
Importantly, this year ASEAN is focusing on developing strategic plans on each pillar and the ASEAN Community Vision 2045 towards building a resilient, innovative, dynamic and people-centred community, as well as the implementation of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In addition, ASEAN is accelerating the accession process to admit Timor-Leste as a full member of ASEAN in the near future.
With respect to the developments in Myanmar, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, as ASEAN Chair, continues to uphold ASEAN’s commitment to assisting Myanmar in finding a peaceful and durable solution to the ongoing problem there through the implementation of the five-point consensus, based on a Myanmar-owned and Myanmar-led process. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic will continue to engage with relevant stakeholders with a view to building an environment conducive to the implementation of the five-point consensus, including the inclusive national dialogue and humanitarian assistance.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic remains steadfast in its efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, focusing on socioeconomic development, environmental protection and poverty reduction. In July, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic presented the third voluntary national review of its SDG implementation at the 2024 High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, which demonstrated that progress towards achieving the SDGs remain slow and off-track. Among those, the implementation of our national sustainable development goal 18, “Lives safe from unexploded ordinance”, has seen progress in varying degrees. However, unexploded ordinance remains a major threat to the lives of the Lao people and hinders their national development, while obstructing progress on other SDGs. We therefore take this opportunity to call upon the international community to provide predictable and adequate support and assistance to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in addressing that long overdue and challenging problem, in accordance with the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is of the view that one of the main obstacles to implementing the SDGs is insufficient funding. As such, there is an urgent need to reform the international financial architecture through collaboration among the United Nations development system, development partners and the international financial institutions, while promoting the participation of the developing countries in international economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic governance. It is our ongoing position that the United Nations development system at all levels must enhance its role in cooperating with and providing support to Member States, especially the least developed countries, the landlocked developing countries and the small island developing States, in order to help address their special needs and challenges.
Another key factor that can help accelerate national development efforts is the role of science, technology and innovation, including artificial intelligence, in facilitating green growth and digitalization that are environmentally friendly, in addition to investment in carbon capture and storage. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic therefore calls on the international community to facilitate access to and transfer of appropriate technology and innovation to help jumpstart development, including support for the implementation of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic’s strategic plan and vision for the development of its digital economy.
Furthermore, I am of the view that human capital is another decisive factor. Presently, one-third of the Lao population are within the age range of 10 to 24, making the Lao People’s Democratic Republic the nation with the youngest population in South-East Asia. Those figures are projected to continuously grow for the next 10 years. At the same time, the working-age population is expected to increase to around 67 per cent of the total population by 2030, as compared to 63 per cent in 2020. The Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has invested in its human capital development in order to reap the benefits of its demographic dividend. As part of such efforts, the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic organized its first Human Capital Summit on Education in 2023 and its second Summit on Nutrition in 2024, aimed at enhancing education quality, basic health care and nutrition for the Lao people.
On graduation from least developed country (LDC) status, the Lao Government adopted the Lao People’s Democratic Republic Smooth Transition Strategy for LDC Graduation by 2026 and Beyond. According to the outcome of the triennial review by the United Nations Committee for Development Policy in early 2024, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic continues to meet all three thresholds for graduation by 2026. However, in the current situation, we are of the view that we must continue to focus our forces and efforts on coping with external shocks and addressing domestic economic and financial difficulties, as well as the impacts of natural disasters, including ongoing floods, in cooperation with the United Nations and development partners, in order for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic to be able to overcome the various obstacles and maintain its development momentum towards a smooth, quality and sustainable graduation from LDC status.
I take this opportunity to commend the international community for the successful outcome of the Summit of the Future, which reaffirmed the strong commitment of world leaders to supporting multilateralism, the maintenance of peace and the promotion of international cooperation for sustainable development through the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which focuses on the world’s current challenges and on building a better future for future generations.
In that connection, the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I) has set the goals of eliminating all obstacles and facilitating digital cooperation at the international level, while also ensuring that technological progress contributes to the acceleration of the achievement of the SDGs. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic always takes our common responsibility for future generations into consideration, and therefore highly values the adoption of the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1, annex II), which prescribes the principles and commitments to protecting our world peace and stability, ensuring equal access to social services, information and innovation and addressing the impacts of climate change, among others. All of those agreements will help ensure the sustainability of our planet so as to guarantee that future generations can continue to use natural resources in the future.
Despite being one of the least pollution-emitting countries in the world, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, like many other countries, has encountered the severe consequences of climate change and natural disasters. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has therefore adopted its National Strategic Plan on Climate Change and committed to contributing to international efforts to address climate change. I take this opportunity to congratulate everyone on the success of the High-Level Meeting on Sea Level Rise on 25 September, which reiterated the need for strong international cooperation to address climate change. Notwithstanding the fact that the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is landlocked, we stand ready to contribute to international efforts to protect the environment, while calling for support measures to further increase adaptation capacity and resilience for responding to future impacts.
Last but not least, I reaffirm the consistent support of the Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for multilateralism and the principles stipulated in the United Nations Charter and international law. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic continues to uphold its cooperation with the States Members of the United Nations and regional countries to contribute to the cause of maintaining peace and security, promoting the prosperity of all nations worldwide, overcoming the challenges of today and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals in order to provide enabling conditions for a bright future for current and new generations.
