At the outset, I wish to warmly congratulate the President of the General Assembly on his election to the helm of the Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. We wish him every success and convey to him our full support for his agenda, “Unity in diversity for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”.
Lebanon is currently enduring a crisis that is threatening its very existence. The future of our people and our prosperity are imperilled. This is a situation that requires urgent international intervention before it spirals out of control, with a domino effect that would make it impossible to contain, its flames impossible to extinguish, a black hole that would engulf regional and international peace and security. The crisis in Lebanon threatens to devastate the entire Middle East if the situation does not change and if the world stands by and watches.
We welcome the statement made yesterday by the United States and by France, supported by friendly countries, offering the possibility of a long-term truce and helping to ensure stability along the border and the return of displaced persons. We demand that all possible measures be taken for it to be put into practice.
What we are currently experiencing in Lebanon is the result of the failure to reach a sustainable solution, not the cause — the cause is the occupation, and we wish to reiterate that fact, explicitly. End the occupation, as it is the cause of what we are suffering. To claim anything else would be a waste of time. As long as the occupation continues, there will be instability and wars.
Through the United Nations, we have repeatedly tried to resolve the outstanding border disputes with Israel. However, Israel has continuously ignored the matter. Despite the current difficult situation, Lebanon is fully committed to international legitimacy. We seek refuge in decisions pursuant to international law. Lebanon is a country that contributed to the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights through one of its sons, Charles Malik. As much as we regret the historical inability of the United Nations to protect us from Israeli aggression, thus far we have remained committed to the role of this Organization as a front-line defence against occupation, violence, devastation and oppression. Today we desperately need the United Nations to play its role as a refuge for peace-loving small countries that have been the victims of aggression, including my homeland, Lebanon. And f From the womb of the tragedy we are living, a. And despite our bitter reality, we still look forward to constructive dialogue as an alternative to the language of weapons to resolve conflict. Lebanon has demonstrated its ability to be a reliable partner in building consensus, as was the case in October 2022, when the maritime border between Lebanon and Israel was delimited. That is proof of our commitment to negotiation to resolve disputes peacefully.
Furthermore, during two Security Council meetings — the most recent held on 17 July (see S/PV.9687) — on the situation in the Middle East, we proposed an integrated framework to achieve a sustainable truce on Lebanon’s southern border. Today we wish to reiterate our call for a ceasefire on all fronts, as an opportunity and a prerequisite towards the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), which has been effective in establishing a relative degree of stability in southern Lebanon, from the end of the July 2006 war until 7 October 2023.
We also count on the support of the international community, in particular friendly countries, for the Lebanese Government to enhance the deployment of the Lebanese Army south of the Litani River, provide it with the equipment it needs and ensure that troop levels can be increased, following the launch by the State of a conscription campaign. That is part of a clear commitment to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), to ensure that there will be no weapons that are not authorized by the Lebanese Government and no authority other than the Lebanese Government, as stipulated in the above-mentioned resolution. Our request for support is not only a reflection of our commitment to honour our obligations under Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), but it is also our confirmation of the importance of cooperation with the international community to overcome security challenges in order to bolster peace and security in the region.
We are all aware of the economic crisis that has been plaguing our country. Despite this, our Government has taken a decision to mobilize an additional 1,500 soldiers to be deployed to the south of the country. This is not a mere detail, but a clear political signal to the international community, reflecting the fact that Lebanon is committed and fully intends to implement Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). Even at the worst of times, including now, we are not standing idly by. We are mobilizing our efforts at the highest level to protect our people, our national institutions and our sovereignty.
Perhaps one of the most significant provisions of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) is the reaffirmation of the internationally recognized borders of Lebanon, delimited between Lebanon and Palestine in 1923 and reaffirmed in the General Armistice Agreement between Lebanon and Israel signed on the island of Rhodes in 1949, under the auspices of the United Nations. This will be achieved with the completion of the process to agree on the 13 disputed border points. Pursuant to that, Israel will withdraw from all Lebanese land that it still occupies to the internationally recognized border.
We wish to reiterate our commitment to the role of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the peacekeeping force that is active in the south of Lebanon. Since its establishment, it has contributed to stability and peace in the region, and, until 8 October 2023, there had been no grave incidents threatening regional peace and security. We wish to take this opportunity to thank UNIFIL for the tremendous sacrifice it has made in the light of the tremendous challenges it has been facing, in particular over recent months and days.
On the other hand, instead of Israel being satiated with continuous wars and more than 75 years of fighting, we see it continuously becoming more radical. One of the gravest challenges Lebanon currently faces is the increase in aggression. The war has expanded and has spilled over into Lebanese territory. We are increasingly concerned about the systematic destruction of Lebanese border villages, the collective punishment of our people and the burning of agricultural land with white phosphorus, making it unusable for many years.
In recent days we have borne witness to an ugly and disgusting model of electronic devices intended for civilian use being turned into timed bombs. They were deliberately and simultaneously blown up, claiming the lives of dozens of people, including children and women, and resulting in injuries to thousands, hundreds of whom are in critical condition. Hundreds were maimed or lost their sight.
From this rostrum, we reiterate our warning against increased aggression and reckless attempts to play with fire seeking to plunge the entire Middle East into a conflagration. We reiterate our rejection of war and our legitimate right to self-defence, pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and international law, while we strive through our contacts and meetings to avoid falling into the trap of Israeli recklessness, which is attempting to extend and expand the war.
The return of displaced Israelis to their towns and settlements will not be achieved through war, bombing, fighting and further displacement of the Lebanese. The shortest path to their return is a comprehensive and immediate ceasefire in accordance with the joint statement issued yesterday by the United States and France and supported by friendly countries. The comprehensive and full implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), as part of an integrated package with clear, declared and transparent international guarantees, entails a definitive cessation of Israeli land, sea and air violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and its internationally recognized borders, which have exceeded 35,000 violations from 2006 to the present day.
Has Israel not had its fill of continuous wars since 1948? When will the time come for Israel to give peace a genuine chance? Would it not like to try the path of peace at least once from start to finish, instead of the language of iron, fire, blood and destruction? Lebanon and the Arab countries have clearly and unambiguously chosen peace by adopting the Arab Peace Initiative at the Arab Summit in Beirut in 2002, agreeing to the two-State solution and demanding the implementation of United Nations resolutions, which have unfortunately remained dead letter. It is now up to Israel — all of Israel, both government and people — to truly want peace, choose it over war and overcome its apprehensions about security. Breaking the cycle of violence in the region, putting an end to escalation and, in so doing, forestalling the potential explosion of the entire Middle East will also require collective action within a specific time frame, with clear guarantees to recognize legitimate rights, primarily the right to self-determination, in accordance with the relevant internationally recognized resolutions. There can be no peace without a two-State solution, no matter how long it takes.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for a sustainable solution, for the full and balanced implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and for our internationally recognized land borders to be clearly proclaimed in order to spare Lebanon and the region further war and devastation. We are going through a very difficult period, characterized by a tragic escalation of violence in Lebanon. At the heart of the conflict, Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) constitutes Lebanon’s first line of defence. That resolution is not merely a document or a framework; rather, it represents the international community’s commitment to maintaining regional security and stability. We cannot deviate from that path, as it is the legal and diplomatic foundation that guarantees the protection of Lebanese and regional security. Compliance with that resolution is essential not only for Lebanon, but also for Israel and the entire region. It is the best tool that the international community has to stop the cycle of violence so that diplomacy can prevail, however difficult the road to it may be.
The cost of diplomatic failure is too high. We must not forget that every round of violence brings with it unimaginable suffering, especially for civilians. The killing of any civilian is an unacceptable tragedy and impossible to justify. When civilian areas are systematically targeted, as they are in Lebanon, we are talking about acts that amount to war crimes. Nothing can justify the indiscriminate killing of innocent people. However, while talking about death and destruction, we must also focus on solutions. Time is running out, and it is critical that we find a political diplomatic path out of this growing crisis. The only way forward is a political solution. Together we must think about how to find a political way out of this crisis, rather than plunging deeper into militarizing, intensifying and prolonging the conflict. Diplomacy is not always easy, but it is the only way to save lives, innocent people and nations. Lebanon is determined to follow that path. Lebanon sees in the American-French initiative, with the support of other friendly countries, an opportunity for respite and create an opening in the midst of this crisis — perhaps Israel will seize that opportunity. Diplomacy must succeed. We have no other choice.
