I am honoured to address the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth regular session for the first time as President, on behalf of the Government and the people of Liberia, after a smooth back-to-back democratic transition. Liberia congratulates His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. He can be assured of Liberia’s support as he steers the affairs of the General Assembly. I praise His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for his astute leadership during his presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session and commend his determination to inspire and rekindle hope globally. I deeply thank Secretary-General António Guterres for the remarkable and visionary leadership he continues to provide in pursuit of our collective mandate.
In the summer of 1945, Liberia joined other nations in San Francisco as one of the original signatories to the Charter of the United Nations. On that momentous day, the world, having suffered the scourge of war, was full of hope and determined to reverse the past. Nearly 80 years on and reflecting on the preamble of the Charter, which declares our commitment to promoting social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, we ask the question: Has our reaffirmation of faith in the dignity and worth of the human person, made eight decades ago, been realized? We must admit that the world has changed and that the frontiers that we now embrace are different. Innate greed, insensitivity to the poor, the international drug epidemic, money laundering, the dynamics of climate change and the impact of social media must compel us to rethink our approach to global peace and security. Our beloved United Nations must undergo the institutional and philosophical reflection required to respond to the new age.
As we assemble under the theme “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”, it is important to recognize the shared values and collective efforts that come from our unity within diversity. We must acknowledge them as being essential for advancing peace, sustainable development and the inherent dignity of every human being worldwide. By doing so, we can build a better world where no one is left behind. Like many nations gathered here, Liberia recommits to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Since the end of the country’s conflict, we have striven to follow a development path that will lead to building a capable State. Twelve years ago, we dared to dream of a future within the realm of possibility, harbouring core national aspirations to transform the future. Known as Liberia Rising or Vision 2030, it has been the driving force behind all our planning efforts. The building blocks and tenets of Vision 2030 are significantly aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals. Our Government’s ARREST Agenda for Inclusive Development is a comprehensive approach developed to address the economic and social needs of millions of Liberians, in particular young people, who account for 60 per cent of our population. With an emphasis on agriculture, roads and infrastructure development, justice and the rule of law, education, sanitation, health and tourism, the Agenda has mainstreamed the SDGs and is designed to take Liberia to the finish line of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The fight against poverty and the promotion of human dignity are steadfast commitments. Despite our progress, poverty remains a significant challenge, with more than half of our population living below the poverty line. The Sustainable Development Goals aim to eradicate poverty in all its forms by 2030, ensure social protection for the poor and vulnerable and improve their access to essential services. Liberia is dedicated to assessing the levels and causes of poverty and to implementing strategies to reduce it and promote shared prosperity.
My Government also acknowledges the pressing need to address maternal and newborn mortality by implementing robust monitoring and evaluation of health services in the country in order to accelerate the reduction of maternal and newborn mortality. We are particularly blessed by and pleased with the United Nations H6 joint mission to Liberia this year, which concluded with a commitment to combat the high burden of increasing newborn deaths. We welcome the General Assembly’s decision to declare 25 July as the International Day of Women and Girls of African Descent (resolution 78/323). That significant milestone acknowledges that women and girls of African descent have unique opportunities and challenges and that the global fight against slavery and racism is necessary to achieve gender equality. Liberia established its credentials by producing the first woman President of the General Assembly, Mrs. Angie Brooks-Randolph, and the first female President of Africa, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Liberia continues to witness the immense contributions of women and girls of African descent to politics, culture and every area of societal development.
Liberia has enjoyed uninterrupted peace for almost two decades, following 14 years of civil conflict. During that time, we have held four democratic elections, with last year’s election marking the fourth since the return to democratic order in 2006. In January 2024, Liberia achieved a historic milestone by peacefully transitioning from one democratic Government to another. That progress is significant because, before the 2018 transition, the previous democratic transition occurred in 1944, about 74 years earlier. We are gradually fostering and solidifying our democratic culture, ensuring that democracy is here to stay in Liberia. Now it is time for our people to reap the democratic dividends. The rule of law is fundamental for peace, justice, strong institutions and dignity for the human person. Liberia is taking significant strides toward openness, transparency and accountability by empowering and supporting transparent institutions. Our Government is committed to implementing audit recommendations by the General Auditing Commission to restore public and donors’ confidence in the governance system and to improve regional and international cooperation.
In addition, the country has taken a major step in confronting its conflict-marked past in order to ensure accountability and justice for crimes and other human rights violations committed during the war and to promote healing and national reconciliation. A significant development in our transitional justice process was the signing, on 2 May 2024, of Executive Order 131 to create an office for the establishment of a war and economic crimes court for Liberia — a key recommendation from the truth and reconciliation process in Liberia.
Our actions align with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the joint follow-up report on impunity and past human rights violations. As we embark on that process and acknowledge the enormity of that task, my Government seeks the support of the United Nations, partners and stakeholders in the pursuit of justice for victims, as well as peace and reconciliation.
Liberia is facing a drug crisis that is affecting our youth and jeopardizing the country’s future. That epidemic, driven by international criminal enterprises and their networks, poses a severe threat. In response, we have not only declared the drug epidemic a health emergency and a national security threat, but we have also taken steps to address the issue by establishing a dedicated national body to tackle drug abuse in Liberia. I urge the international community to join Liberia in addressing the escalating drug crisis.
The world is facing numerous crises, including global threats such as disease, insecurity and climate change, as well as food and resource shortages. Our vulnerabilities are evident, and we need to use our collective knowledge to find solutions that will preserve the planet for future generations. Climate change is undeniably real and its threat to our environment and way of life is becoming increasingly apparent. We must take urgent action to address that threat, including through cooperative efforts to implement article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement.
As the most forested country in West Africa, with over half of its land covered by forests, Liberia plays a vital role in biodiversity and environmental sustainability. As a result, our country is taking important steps to lead the conversation on climate action. My Government has called on our legislature and other stakeholders to begin looking at the Paris Agreement, particularly under article 6, to help advance actions towards establishing Liberia’s nationally determined contribution to combat climate change. While we take those actions, we are mindful of the need to build capacity and invest in critical areas of our economy, such as by using alternative financing to invest in the blue and green economy and using technological transfer to support climate action.
The goals we set for ourselves and for the future are better served on the foundation of peace and security. Having enjoyed peace for over two decades following a long-running conflict, we aim to promote peace and stability at home, in the region and globally. The threat of conflict to our shared world underscores the importance of collaborative efforts to foster regional and global stability and peace. Therefore, we support all efforts by the United Nations to address peace and security issues worldwide.
Liberia is concerned about the escalating security challenges in the West African region, including terrorism and economic and political instability. Those issues pose a significant threat to regional peace. We therefore make an urgent call for full dialogue and cooperation among West African nations in order to address those issues effectively. Meanwhile, Liberia stands firmly with the rest of West Africa in our resolve to keep our 50-year-old regional economic commission — the Economic Community of West African States — intact. We oppose efforts to disintegrate our union and will not accept the region being used for proxy conflicts. We look to the African Union and the United Nations to support us in keeping the regional body united.
Similarly, at the global level, we call for an immediate ceasefire in the Middle East so that we can provide civilians with essential humanitarian relief. We urge both Israel and the Palestinians to engage in negotiations towards lasting peace, including a two-State solution.
Additionally, we see the ongoing conflict in Ukraine as a threat to global peace and security. As such, there is an urgent need for a peaceful resolution that also respects Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
This year’s session of the General Assembly is a pivotal moment for Liberia’s bid to ascend to the African non-permanent seat of the Security Council in 2026. As we proudly announce our candidacy, we look forward to the support of Member States to vote overwhelmingly in favour of Liberia’s election to a non-permanent seat on the Security Council, where we can work with Council members to promote peace and security and justice.
Liberia is dedicated to promoting sustainable growth and ensuring human dignity for all. Liberia is prepared to work together with the United Nations, other global allies and the international community to realize the Sustainable Development Goals and establish a fair, peaceful and sustainable world. That commitment to unity is deeply ingrained in Liberia’s history as a founding member of the United Nations and other post-war international institutions, as well as regional and subregional organizations. It also affirms our strong belief in multilateralism and an international rules-based world order built on shared values and principles crucial to our future. The future of a more peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world must be all-encompassing, fair and dignified for everyone worldwide — one United Nations, one world.
