First of all, I am delighted to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I wish you, Sir, and your team every success.
I would also like to offer my thanks and appreciation to Mr. Denis Francis for his excellent stewardship of the previous session. I also thank the Secretary-General, Mr António Guterres, for his ongoing efforts to promote international peace and security, and for his good offices in achieving the lofty goals of the United Nations, in addition to his role in promoting human rights.
For more than a decade, Libya has endured a series of transitional phases, marked by numerous conflicts and senseless fratricidal wars. That situation has been fuelled by foreign intervention seeking to undermine the State, deepen divisions and exert control over its natural resources and political and social decision-making. A strong stance must now be taken if control is to be reasserted. The challenges that lie ahead remain immense and complex, and we continue to strive for consensual solutions to bring parties together around one table so as to work towards a national solution. Institutional divisions ensuing from the systematic obstruction by some political parties and the resultant disputes about powers and prerogatives have, however, significantly entrenched the political and institutional crisis and further complicated the political landscape. That state of affairs started with the creation of parallel bodies, leading to the freezing of, and reneging on, commitments entered into in political agreements and the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well the exploitation of State resources as a means of exerting political pressure, exemplified most recently by attacks on the Libyan public prosecution service and the judiciary. It is therefore our duty to discharge our responsibility to make our country secure and strong when it comes to the security of our citizens and their livelihood.
Only a comprehensive political solution with financial, economic and security tracks, in addition to a national reconciliation track, is capable of unifying the institutions and fostering stability so that elections can be held, the legitimacy of all institutions can be restored and self-determination can be exercised by the Libyan people. In that context, we commend national and international efforts aimed at promoting dialogue among the various Libyan parties. It is our firm belief that the Libyan people have the right to determine their own destiny and choose who governs them and manages their affairs and resources. That will be achieved when legitimacy is reinstated and control is returned to the people — something that certain parties are doing their utmost to thwart. The Libyan people are perfectly capable of deciding their destiny and who represents them. Consulting the people through fair elections and referendums is the best way to end any political impasse.
The national reconciliation project sponsored by the Presidential Council is proceeding at a sluggish pace as a result of the recent developments in the country and attempts by some political parties to obstruct it by all means. We underscore the importance of accelerating that process so as to create trust. In that vein, we commend the efforts of the African Union. We call for a Libyan dialogue to be fostered in order to form a national pact and hold a comprehensive reconciliation conference. We underline the need for all parties to participate in a constructive manner so as to secure a peaceful settlement on the basis of a Libyan solution, free from foreign dictates and interference as lasting solutions cannot be achieved without a frank and serious dialogue among Libyans themselves, without external interference. Doing so would guarantee the unity, social cohesion and sovereignty of the country.
This month marks the first anniversary of the devastation wrought by Storm Daniel in and around the city of Derna — a painful and unforgettable event that left widespread destruction in its wake and took a heavy human and material toll. Despite the pain and the sorrow, we recall the united and concerted efforts of the Libyan people, who taught us a clear lesson about their resilience in the face of hardship and crises when they decide to resolve their issues for themselves without foreign interference or demands. We also reaffirm our support for the genuine recovery and reconstruction efforts being made throughout the country.
The crimes of genocide and ethnic cleansing being committed by the Israeli occupation against the Palestinian and Lebanese people represent a heinous violation of international law. We are committed to the principle of accountability and to combating impunity. We would point out that Libya has joined South Africa in the case it brought before the International Court of Justice regarding the Israeli entity’s grave violations of international laws, resolutions and treaties, Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel), so as to promote accountability for the violations and genocide to which the Palestinian people are being subjected. We also stress that the spectre of regional war can be eliminated by addressing the situation in Gaza and stopping the grave violations and aggressions taking place in Palestine. We affirm the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and the establishment of their independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital.
At the regional and international levels, we stress the need for concerted efforts in combating illegal immigration and terrorism, as that issue represents a major challenge, not only for Libya but for many countries, in particular African countries and countries in the region. As a transit State, Libya bears a great burden in that regard. We believe that resolving that issue calls for concerted efforts, taking into account national legislation, humanitarian aspects and the protection of migrants’ rights. As for terrorism, Libya has suffered greatly from that scourge and has been able to eliminate Da’esh thanks to the sacrifices of its people, the efforts of the military establishment and the support of the international community. We continue to work to strengthen internal security and border protection by cooperating with the international community to establish security centres to coordinate efforts among the various national security forces and neighbouring countries. The fight against terrorism is not just a military confrontation but a multifaceted phenomenon that requires concerted local and international efforts and a comprehensive approach that addresses its various dimensions. Despite the importance of the efforts of the United Nations in that regard, we believe that it is necessary to develop a national mechanism to address those challenges without any negative interference.
I say that the time has come to close ranks, build bridges of unity and make our solidarity the cornerstone of our homeland. To the generous and life-loving people of our generous homeland, I say that we have not enjoyed and nor will we enjoy our wealth and the wealth of our homeland as long as the seeds of strife and discord continue to thrive among us. Our unity is the key to our stability, and it is the hope that will carry our children towards a better future. I invite the people of Libya to maintain our national unity and to shake off external interference aimed at undermining our endeavours. History bears witness to the greatness of the Libyan people, who have inspired nations and peoples through the ages. They have shown that, despite all the challenges they have gone through, they always come back stronger, more robust and more powerful. Libyans will not forget those who stood by them in times of hardship. We will continue to work to build a bright future worthy of the aspirations and hopes of our people, and we will make all the necessary sacrifices to that end.
