I begin my address to the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly by invoking the wisdom of one of America’s most outstanding orators, the late Martin Luther King, Jr., who said,
“We are now faced with the fact that tomorrow is today. We are confronted
with the fierce urgency of now. In this unfolding conundrum of life and history, there ‘is’ such a thing as being too late. This is no time for apathy or complacency.
This is a time for vigorous and positive action.”
Over the decades, we, the representatives of small island developing States (SIDS), have come to the General Assembly Hall to state the case for fairer treatment of our development needs and our challenges by the international community. We have argued for special and differential treatment because we are indeed different, indeed special and indeed unique in our sizes, our economies, our finances, our social circumstances and our vulnerabilities. We are indeed severely disadvantaged by an unfair global financial system that has amplified its inequities by the measurements and standards it has employed to assess our development. Despite our best efforts, it seems that we were simply engaging in odes to the deaf because there have hardly been the type of concrete and fundamental responses and actions to change the rules and the systems that have been suppressing our development aspirations.
However, we have persisted in our advocacy. We have not abandoned our faith in the strength and advantages of multilateralism. And so today we are pleased to applaud two recent decisions of the international community that provide an expectation that the unique vulnerabilities and special circumstances of Saint Lucia and other SIDS will receive the particular attention they deserve.
I speak first of the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States, recently held in Antigua and Barbuda, which adopted a new 10-year plan of action for SIDS. The Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS is a bold new plan to give priority at the international level to the sustainable development needs of SIDS over the next 10 years and maps out the nature of the support which the international community must deliver in order to achieve them. Through the Agenda, the economies of SIDS can be transformed, so there must be absolutely no delay in its implementation and in delivering on the commitments made to bring life to its provisions. That cannot wait.
The second decision that we applaud is the recent adoption by the United Nations of the multidimensional vulnerability index (MVI). While we note that resolution 78/322, advancing the MVI, calls for its voluntary adoption, Saint Lucia urges the international community to speedily adopt and implement the MVI. It took the international community 32 years to develop and adopt that vital and necessary tool for sustainable development and global equity. Let us not wait another 32 years to test and implement it. The MVI must be brought into use today. It cannot wait. It is urgent because the challenges facing our small, open and vulnerable economies are quite complex.
Caribbean economies have, over the past two decades, been plagued by a number of interrelated and interlocking factors, including persistent fiscal deficits and high debt, stubborn and persistent structural rigidities. Those interrelated factors have been significantly exacerbated by external shocks, including frequent and major fluctuations in energy prices, financial crises and, more recently, the coronavirus disease pandemic and the Russian-Ukraine war, not to mention the planet’s greatest existential threat — climate change. In that regard, there is a pressing need for immediate action to reactivate and accelerate the slow progress that is being made on the issue of climate change and climate justice. The General Assembly needs no reminders of the violent and destructive impact of climate change and the extent of the peril in which the world, particularly SIDS, finds itself as a result.
Saint Lucia is considerably dismayed and disappointed that, after years of advocacy by SIDS to establish the Loss and Damage Fund at the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28), the Fund, which should have been activated in July, is yet to be operationalized. Saint Lucia therefore urges those concerned to swiftly and urgently operationalize the Loss and Damage Fund so that SIDS can receive timely support on the scale required to recover from the disastrous impact of climatic events on their small economies and societies. Further, it is essential that, at the forthcoming COP29, the special circumstances of SIDS be protected and operationalized across the entire climate change policy agenda. That cannot wait.
In the same way the world must recompense SIDS for the injustice of the climate crisis that we are suffering, those countries that propelled their economic development through the unholy and inhumane transatlantic slave trade and the enslavement of our African ancestors must pay reparations for that crime against humanity, which they inflicted upon the people they brought from Africa to the Caribbean and the Americas, as well as on the indigenous peoples of those regions. Saint Lucia therefore reiterates the call it made at the seventy-eighth session that the United Nations should become seized of the question of reparations for the transatlantic slave trade and slavery in the Western Hemisphere.
It is also why, in part, our Caribbean civilization resents the current carnage in Gaza and the West Bank. In Gaza for the past year, over 41,000 persons, the majority of them women and children, have been killed by the Israeli army in the name of self-defence, occasioned by a terrorist attack on Israel on 7 October 2023, in which approximately 1,200 persons were killed. Saint Lucia condemns terrorism in all its forms, by whomever and whatever commits it, but humanitarianism has been lost in the carnage. Since October last year, 289 aid workers, including 207 team members of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, have been killed in Gaza. In addition, more than 110 journalists have been killed. The war in Palestine, what some have referred to as genocide, whatever it is called, must be brought to an end today, for the world has no future with it and no appetite for it.
Year in, year out since its independence, Saint Lucia has been calling for the recognition and establishment of a Palestinian State. However, to date there continues to be needless impediments to that accomplishment. I respectfully submit that the unnecessary undermining of Palestinian statehood is, to a large extent, the root cause of the current Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live side-by-side in peace. However, peace for Israel must not come at the expense of the Palestinian people, nor can a permanent ceasefire be based on the whims and fancies of Israel. It must be predicated upon meaningful and honest negotiations, utilizing the tools of diplomacy. Hence, no State should become a material accomplice to aggression against the Israeli and Palestinian people.
The solution is not far-fetched or unreachable. The Palestinians must be allowed to exercise their right to self-determination and to have their own State and full membership of the United Nations alongside the State of Israel, in accordance with United Nations resolutions that go back to resolution 181 (II) of 1947 and include resolution 3236 (XXIX) of 1974, which reaffirmed the inherent rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty, and the right of the Palestinians to return to their homes and property. The only way to secure a just and peaceful future in the Middle East and for Israel to have secure borders is for the Palestinian people to live in their own internationally recognized homeland. The right to self-determination is a universal right, and the Palestinians are no exception. The people of Palestine cannot wait.
It is that same right which says that the people of Ukraine must be allowed to choose their own destiny and that Russia must end its unwarranted war against Ukraine and restore and respect the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
It is that same right of self-determination that dictates that the heroic people of Cuba have a right to determine their own path to political, economic and social development and that the economic embargo imposed on Cuba for the past 64 years by the United States is illegal, unjust and inhumane. It must be ended forthwith, in accordance with the many resolutions of the General Assembly dating back to 1992, which have rejected that embargo totally and overwhelmingly. The people of Cuba cannot wait.
Further, Cuba’s emphasis on medical internationalism as its central foreign policy objective, as well as its non-involvement in armed conflicts abroad, invalidate Cuba’s inclusion on the United States list as a State sponsor of terrorism. Instead, given that it is well established that Cuba’s alternative model of development has provided important social benefits to the Cuban people, coupled with its emphasis on medical internationalism, it should be on a list of countries acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations. No one must be left behind.
It is that same right to self-determination that says that the 23.5 million people of the Republic of China on Taiwan have the right to be a Member of the United Nations and other international organizations and that resolution 2758 (XXVI) of 1971 does not preclude Taiwan’s inclusion and participation in the United Nations system. We believe that Taiwan, with the twentieth largest economy in the world and with its important role in technological development and world trade has much to offer from which the international community can benefit. No one must be left behind.
It is that same right to self-determination that says that the people and the Government of Venezuela must be allowed to conduct their internal affairs without sanctions imposed upon them by other States.
In Haiti, the situation remains unstable and deeply concerning, although some political advances have been registered through the efforts of the Caribbean Community’s Eminent Persons Group of three former Prime Ministers. However, the international community has provided only 14 per cent of the resources required by the Multinational Security Support Mission for Haiti. We welcome the announcement of the President of Kenya this week that it will deploy 600 more security forces to Haiti by November and we thank the Government of Kenya for its support of the Haitian people. The funding required for humanitarian assistance in Haiti is also woefully short of its target. We therefore call upon all other countries that have pledged to assist Haiti to urgently and immediately fulfil their commitments to doing so. Haiti cannot wait.
In view of the foregoing, to safeguard the future we have to be prepared to take action now — this moment, this very minute, at this time — on certain issues that are essential for a peaceful and sustainable future. We cannot and must not be selective about which declarations of the Pact or of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations we will respect and when we will do so.
In the convening of the Summit of the Future this week and in the theme that is guiding the deliberations of the seventy-ninth session, the international community has seemingly come to understand that it can no longer procrastinate and no longer delay the actions needed to secure a better future for humankind. Let us for once, therefore, turn our words into actions. The time for action is now. The time to make multilateralism truly work, not just for SIDS but for all of us, is now. The time for reform of the Security Council is now. The time for climate justice for SIDS is now. The time to end the conflicts, genocides and wars is now. The time to give the youth of this planet, who are the people of tomorrow, the hope and the opportunities to better themselves is now. The time to put humanity first is now.
If we act together today for peace, sustainable development and justice, no one will be left behind and there will be a better tomorrow. Consequently, if we do not act with the fierce urgency of now, our United Nations speeches and resolutions, in the words of Martin Luther King Jr., “will end up as a meaningless drama on the stage of history… shrouded with ugly garments of shame”.
