The United Nations is a special meeting place for all countries — that is what our Head of State said in his very first speech at the United Nations General Assembly (see A/45/PV.1), when Liechtenstein became a member 34 years ago. It is a singular forum, where not only countries come together but peoples. I was very young then, just about to enter high school, but I remember vividly the sense of significance that prevailed among us back in 1990. The wish to safeguard our sovereignty was a key incentive for us — a theme that resonates so strongly among many small States today. We have never seen membership as just an end in itself.
The United Nations has been a key foreign policy platform for Liechtenstein. We have made a significant political investment, developed our own profile, been an independent voice and put forward our own initiatives — most recently the veto initiative. For us — the people and the Government of Liechtenstein — the main purpose of the United Nations remains peace and security, to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, in the immortal words of the Charter of the United Nations.
It saddens me to say that this purpose has lost none of its relevance today. The aggression against Ukraine, planned and perpetrated by those who wield power in the Russian Federation, has not only destroyed the European security architecture. It has undermined the international legal order as such, and it has created a real risk and genuine fear of future illegal warmaking — not just in our part of the world. After enjoying long decades of peace, which is much more than the absence of war, our people have been able to live in prosperity and with full respect for human rights. As a small State without armed forces, the guarantor of our sovereignty is respect for international law, which the United Nations embodies like no other organization. Our unequivocal stance in support of Ukraine is therefore a commitment to the international order and, ultimately, to our own security.
More than two years of brutal war of aggression have brought immeasurable human suffering, economic devastation of immense proportions and environmental damage for decades to come. Many of those outcomes are, sadly, irreversible. But together, we have the opportunity and the responsibility to bring about a just peace. And indeed, there will be no peace without justice. Peace must therefore be based on the terms we have already set together in this Hall, and it must guarantee individual criminal accountability for those who have — wilfully and unprovoked — initiated this war of aggression. That alone will ensure that there is a prospect for sustainable peace for Ukraine, but also for the region as a whole. That alone will give small States everywhere the confidence and belief that their sovereignty and territorial integrity will be protected and safeguarded here at the United Nations, while demonstrating that we are committed to and capable of fulfilling the purpose that brought us together in this Organization.
Much of what we have done in recent years here in New York has been driven by the belief that we must safeguard the role of the United Nations in maintaining peace and security. We support a strong Security Council but see little indication that it will be able to come together in the manner that the current challenges require. Rather than criticizing and lamenting what is a political reality, we have to think about alternative avenues — avenues that do indeed exist.
The Assembly is the key platform in that respect. It has taken the lead on Ukraine, and it has adopted important decisions on the Gaza war. And, under the terms of the veto initiative, which has resonated so strongly in this Hall, the Assembly is given the option to act whenever the Council is paralysed by a veto. The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) has given us the necessary basis to continue what we have begun and to chart a new path for peace and security. Only by working together will we be able to deliver on that promise.
For almost a year now, the situation in the Middle East has absorbed much of our attention. We witnessed with horror the terrorist attack on the civilian population of Israel on 7 October 2023. And we are shocked and appalled by the suffering of the civilian population of Gaza and by the many thousands of innocent victims, a very large number of whom are children, which is simply unacceptable. The protection of civilians is a key priority on the agenda of the United Nations. However, it seems to be a mere afterthought for those making the decisions on both sides of the conflict, whose actions cause human suffering and threaten stability in the region. We are deeply concerned about the next level of escalation between Israel and Hizbullah, and we join the call for a 21-day ceasefire in order to prevent a further conflagration in the region.
Liechtenstein is a strong supporter of the two-State solution. As such, in our response and our decision-making, we have prioritized the protection of all affected civilians. We have contributed humanitarian assistance to the civilian population. We have called for the full respect for international humanitarian law by all, and, with that, I call again for the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages. We support the efforts by the International Criminal Court to investigate according to its mandate. The two-State solution, which enjoys overwhelming support among all of us in this Hall, was decided by the General Assembly itself many decades ago. There is no other conflict in which the United Nations has a clearer and longer-lasting responsibility.
The end of the war in Gaza will be only one step in the long and difficult path to a two-State solution that allows Israel and Palestine to live together in peace and security, in line with the right of all peoples to self-determination. Knowing that that will take time, it is even more important that all actors stop escalating the conflict further and that the human suffering ends today. The United Nations and every single Member State need to live up to the goal we set for ourselves many years ago and bring this conflict to an end.
The sovereign equality of all countries and respect for international law are key for all United Nations Members to thrive — but even more so for smaller ones. It is no surprise, then, that in this building, my country is known, in particular, for our clear and consistent stance in support of the rule of law. We are proud of the work that we have done on international law. And it is a commitment we are determined to continue, especially as there is no doubt that international law is under attack from more sides and in more ways than ever before.
Today I call on the Assembly — I call on all of us — to face this challenge as an opportunity, and to come together and unite in a way that brings together all those who need international law to be upheld for their survival and prosperity, all of those whose best — and sometimes only — defence is that the rules governing the conduct between States since 1945 are actually enforced, all of us who are willing to stand up for each other, driven by both solidarity and enlightened self-interest. Today this is a moment for us to realize that we must not take the existence of the United Nations for granted, that this Organization’s foundation is rooted in international law — but also that we in this Hall are the ones who have the power and means necessary, if we work together.
Doom and gloom are not the hallmark of leadership. We are encouraged by the fact that small States in particular are increasingly standing up for the rule of law and against the rule of might. We are gratified to see that the International Court of Justice and its decisions are looked to for guidance in our decision-making, in challenges ranging from the two-State solution to the applicability of the Genocide Convention to climate change. This is a good and, more importantly, a necessary time to be the change that we want to see in the world.
We politicians have the privilege, the agency and a voice that we have to use. That, in my view, also comes with the obligation to speak up for those who do not have a voice. In a shockingly literal sense, the women of Afghanistan do not have a voice at all anymore. I therefore want to speak up for them from this rostrum. The denial of even their most basic human rights must be completely unacceptable for this Organization and its representatives. We will continue to demand that the United Nations live up to its special obligation and support action to fight that extreme case of gender persecution. We must also speak up against the brutal oppression of women in Iran.
Women across the world have been speaking up as agents of change for many years. We must ensure that those voices are amplified at the highest levels. As experience has shown, we will get better results for everyone if we entrust leadership positions much more often to women. Like many others, I believe that it is a credibility challenge for the United Nations that a woman has yet to lead the Organization. After decades of talking about gender equality, the United Nations should shine as an example.
We simply need to do what we have promised, on peace — the central mission of the Organization — gender equality, human rights, deterring aggression and ensuring accountability. The collective action so urgently needed today requires strong leadership, which is often lacking these days. Leadership, whether provided by women or men, comes with responsibility, accountability and the ability and willingness to listen to and work in the interests of those we represent. All of us who have had the privilege to speak from this podium have an obligation to present and future generations to deliver on the great hopes placed in our United Nations. Only then will the Organization be the singular place that serves the people of the world in their desire for world peace.
