It is an honour to be in front of the General Assembly again and to be able to speak about the situation and how we see the world. I have listened to a lot of speeches and, when I consider the main theme of the topic we discussed last week and early this week — “leaving no one behind” — I have to say that we are in a bit of a special situation. How can we explain to someone in Palestine, in Lebanon, in Kyiv or in so many different places around the world that we want to leave no one behind? How can we explain to some countries that now, after some national elections, development aid for the poorer countries is being cut even as we say, “leave no one behind”? How can we say to the people demonstrating outside that we came here together to find solutions to all the troubles that we have nowadays? I can say that, for them, we are just discussing but not acting. We are like a barking dog without teeth, barking all the time but leaving so many people behind.
That is not a very optimistic introduction, but it is the case of how things today when we see that, at the moment, 60 conflicts are being waged and about 50 more could start tomorrow. ln total, we have about 115 conflicts, potential or ongoing, from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Yemen, from the Sudan to Myanmar, from Syria to Venezuela, from Haiti to Libya, from Armenia to Azerbaijan. The whole world is in fact, if we look at it geographically, in conflict. We have the big conflicts that we speak a lot about, but we also have all the little conflicts that are not on our agenda every day but where people suffer a great deal too.
I have a meeting next week with representatives of the French-speaking countries and, as I want to be welcomed, I will continue in French.
In talking about the major ongoing conflicts, let me start with that in Ukraine. This week, we had the attendance of President Zelenskyy and many of us have been to Kyiv to support our Ukrainian colleagues. I remember the discussions we have held, and today I see one or two representatives of the Russian Federation in the Hall, which is already a new opportunity — because most of the time when we speak, they leave the room — to be able to simply ask them again today: Why this war? Why this war?
I remember very well that, early in the conflict, some thought that it was not my role — but I did it anyway — to dialogue with President Putin and President Zelenskyy to try to find a point of exchange. I remember the arguments — and I will not speak here publicly about the exchange I had with President Putin — that were made to justify Russia’s war on Ukraine. I recall that those arguments cited the Nazis, who were supposedly present everywhere in Ukraine, and that it was Ukraine that wanted to scare Russia and posed a threat to Russia. Starting a war is easy; ending a war requires greatness. We can organize and hold peace conferences, but without the presence of Russia and China, those are merely moments of moral support for Ukraine. But if we want to find a solution, we must find a moment when all partners are around the table to seek a lasting solution for Ukraine.
We have experienced it ourselves. Luxembourg is a small country. Twice we have been the victim of aggression; twice we have had a neighbour that thought it knew better than we did what was good for my country. We therefore understand Ukraine’s suffering. We understand what it means to have a neighbour that is bigger than us and that thinks it knows best. It is through the European Union that Germany today is a partner country, a brother country alongside France and Belgium. We had the courage in 1957 to draw up the Treaty of Rome that launched the European Union, which is above all a peace project.
When I think of the list I cited earlier of the conflicts being fought throughout the world, it is clear that the European Union, while not always setting the best example in everything, lives in peace. That goes from the Baltic countries to Portugal; it goes from Greece to Ireland. And it is clear that it works to be able to sit around a table and talk, where once there were conflicts and weapons and force were the answer. Let us therefore sit with our partners around the table; let us have peace dialogues in which we also have a Russian partner and a Chinese partner that participate; let us have a programme and a plan for the future.
Luxembourg is doing what it can. We have strongly supported demining projects. I have just returned from Laos, where even today, 30 or 40 years after the war, people are being killed by mines, the remnants of that war. Let us not forget that even if the war in Ukraine were to end tomorrow, there will still be victims tomorrow, the day after tomorrow and beyond, the human consequences of having laid mines everywhere. We must also help the children who have been deported to Russia and ensure that impunity does not become the rule in those situations.
As I speak of major conflicts, it will be understood when I move on from Ukraine to the Middle East. This week, we held discussions with partners for a two-State solution. For me, what matters is that today we must be aware that there will be no winner in that war. There will be no winner. What are we provoking? How do we explain to a young Israeli that Palestine is a friendly country when his sister or brother may still be a hostage of Hamas? How do we explain to a young Palestinian that Israel is his neighbour and his friend when he buried his parents the day before? That is the reality on the ground. What we are provoking is generations of hatred for the next 20 or 30 years; they will not be able to sit around a table where the hatred is deep and real, and one will continue to hate the other. Are we aware of that?
I listened to the Israeli Prime Minister yesterday (see A/79/PV.13). Someone could tell me tomorrow that there would be no more terrorism after the death of the leader of Hizbullah, but we must understand that those terrorist acts and terrorist organizations are like octopuses. If we cut off an arm, another will grow. It is an ideology, and the best defence against fanaticism is to hope like a young person. Yet we are destroying hope. We are creating, if we do not find a solution quickly, a future generation of Hamas and Hizbullah adherents, people who will hate each other in a region that is already very prone to conflict.
There are already 40,000 dead in Gaza. I recall that Israel wants to place the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), an agency of our Organization, on the list of terrorist organizations. Are we all going to accept that our own agency in that region is considered a terrorist organization? I would advise those who do not know the work of UNRWA to go to Palestine and see what it does on the ground. Without UNRWA there is no health care; without UNRWA there is no education; without UNRWA there is no food. UNRWA does everything in that country. As we speak, it is even taking care of the rubble and the garbage so that Palestine does not overflow. It does everything there. I invite everyone to go and see for themselves. More than 200 UNRWA staff members have already paid with their lives for the work they do there for the Palestinians. If we accept here that UNRWA is considered a criminal organization, we are opening a Pandora’s box to everything. We simply have to see that today there is no alternative to UNRWA. Just because someone says, “I will be able to replace UNRWA, I will take care of Palestine tomorrow”, that does not mean they will succeed in doing so. I therefore strongly urge everyone here to try and convince Israel. If it puts one of our own agencies on a terrorist list and we do not react, we are in fact complicit in accepting everything.
I understand that Israel has a right to defend itself, but there are limits. It is important to be balanced as well. What annoys me the most in this case is that I am told, “Either you are for Israel and you are against Palestine, or you are for Palestine and therefore you are against Israel”. But we can be for peace. We can be for civilians without having to say that we are for one or the other. We are too invested in believing that one must be right and the other wrong in this scenario, but today it is civilians who are dying.
We also talk of recognition. My country is one of the few that have not yet made that recognition. Three or four countries decided to do so over the past few weeks and months. That is good, but recognition is a one-time event. I can only do it once, and I do not want to do it just as a symbolic act. I want it to have an impact as well. I therefore have another message for all those that have not yet done so.
We need a two-State solution, and we must know that peace in Palestine will mean security for Israel and that without peace in Palestine there will never be guaranteed security for Israel. One does not happen without the other. I am seeking and like to have such coordination at the country level, and in its absence I would consider, for example, the possible opening of diplomatic representation for Israel and Palestine, which we do not yet have in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, to showcase the symbolism of having two States that we recognize.
When I think of the vote that was held here a short time ago on whether we agreed with the interpretation of the International Court of Justice, I note that we asked for an opinion. After deciding whether we will respect an opinion or not, it is not up to a judge to decide whether we agree or not. Either we ask a judge and then respect a decision of an international body, or else there is no point in having one.
In talking of difficult situations, we must also consider the Sahel, concerning which we debated as partners only a few years ago. Today we are seeing the same coups and instability that prevail elsewhere in Africa, people who are taking refuge for fear of being mistreated by putschists who have taken power overnight. I am not only Minister for Foreign Affairs but also Minister of Cooperation. We have talked about the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), about investment, and — as I recall from my 10 years as the former Prime Minister — the Sustainable Development Goals that we set ourselves. Moreover, this year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. And yet, we talk about it, but we forget.
As the new Minister of Cooperation, I have set new criteria. For example, when I sign an agreement with a country, I do not want to dictate, because for too long Europe thought it knew better than the Africans themselves what was good for Africa. Africans must forge their own way, but it is important to support them. Through a policy of cooperation, we can have partnerships, we can have exchanges and we can have collaborations. I have not asked those countries for minerals, political power or an economic return. I have not asked them to change their legislation. All I ask is that we do not go backwards and that the rights that some people already enjoy be respected. With respect to women’s rights, in one country that is a Member here women no longer have the right to be educated. Do we accept that and keep quiet? No, I will not keep quiet. Do we accept that certain religions can no longer be practiced in certain countries, where they say, “no, you do not have that right?” No, I will not keep quiet. I ask that the rights of minorities, including sexual rights, simply be respected if they are already established, without going back. I will not keep quiet if that is not the case.
I met this week with an African Head of State with whom I wanted to work. I told him of those three conditions and the desire to see them respected. That Head of State told me that, concerning sexual minorities, if his population found that homosexuality was a crime, he would criminalize it. Being a Head of State is not always about doing what the majority wants, but it is also about defending minorities. We cannot always act on what some want to do against others. Diversity is a country’s wealth. When he tells me that tomorrow may have to criminalize or rescind rights that exist today or go further still, I cannot have a calm dialogue or tell myself that this country is going in the right direction. I regret it, but I will not force anyone to change their law on abortion; to open synagogues, mosques or churches on every street corner; to allow marriage for all or to accord rights that do not already exist. But they must not backtrack. These are battles that we have experienced ourselves here in Europe and elsewhere. No one should make the mistake of returning to a time that was not good for them.
We talk about the Pact for the Future, but we also have Sustainable Development Goal 16, on the rule of law and justice. We had a meeting at our Embassy — for the organization of which I thank all our colleagues — to discuss respect for the rule of law. I will not lecture anyone, because even we in the European Union have certain countries that view it with a certain flexibility that I do not find altogether acceptable. We even have recourse against certain countries within our European Union, but we must still maintain the backbone of the rule of law, justice and women’s rights.
Speaking of women’s rights, in my country, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, we discussed the idea of offering a bonus or giving extra money to political parties that put more women on the electoral lists. But why give a bonus for doing something that is normal? We simply decided that whoever does not do so will get less money, but why should we give something extra because we do something normal? We can move forward logically instead of seeking to reward something that, in our eyes, is simply or should be normal.
When I talk about the environment and consider our goals, I note that the subject has been a bit overlooked recently. We used to have demonstrations and organized Fridays for the Future, so we were all somewhat aware of the environment. But then the economy took precedence over the environment. Let us not forget that some of us risk disappearing. Luxembourg will not disappear tomorrow, because we are surrounded by Belgium, Germany and France, so there is no risk. But some small islands risk disappearing from our globe in the near future. Are we aware that if we do not act, even if it is not popular, we will leave a legacy to future generations that we will not be proud of?
The twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will soon meet in Baku. The Conference will be of great importance to all of us, including our Azeri friends. The conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia can and, I hope, will be resolved before the Conference in Baku. I ask our friends in Azerbaijan to commit themselves to peace and make us proud to come to Baku. Let us be happy to work together and achieve results that will make everyone happy without having to ask themselves whether there is a risk that tomorrow there could be a conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia. All I can still recommend is that they get it done.
Concerning the dog that barks and does not bite, yes, we have rules at the European level, and here too at the United Nations, that date back to the Second World War. They are relics of the Second World War. We have a relic of the Second World War in the five permanent members of the Security Council, in which Africa is not represented. We must ask ourselves how, in 2024, we can have a Security Council that talks about the world while an entire continent, Africa, remains unrepresented. That is the primary issue. Now we are being told that it would be good if we added such and such a country as a permanent member. I am not opposed to it, but it is not by expanding the circle of the privileged that we will be more effective.
If we really want to be more effective, we must ask ourselves whether it is normal for a permanent member to be able to block a process by casting a veto? It is not. I think we must imagine a reform of the Security Council whereby, if one country casts a veto, a two-thirds majority could vote in the other direction than the member that cast the veto, in which case there would be a vote by the plenary General Assembly in which a two-thirds vote in opposition to the veto would nullify the veto. If we want to move forward, that is the only way. Claiming that having more members on the Security Council will allow us to be more effective will simply further widen the problem because we will have even more members with the veto power.
I will conclude by saying that being a permanent member of this house is not a privilege; it is a responsibility. If we look back in time, it was assumed by countries that were there to guarantee peace. They were the big countries acting as guarantors of peace, whereas today some of them are more like troublemakers and prevent us from finding peace agreements that are in everyone’s interest. My dream is that one day I will be able to address the Assembly in the conviction that it can be said that in this world — and I said this three or four years ago — regardless of where I was born, the colour of my skin, the religion I practice, the kind of sex I engage in, my sexual orientation or the wealth of my parents, I have the same opportunities, the same rights and the same duties. When that happens, I will be proud to be part of the international community.
