First of all, I wish to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang of Cameroon, on assuming the post of President of the General Assembly. I assure him of Latvia’s full cooperation along the way.
This year’s debate is of utmost importance. It focuses on today’s interlinked global challenges. It emphasizes the need for a comprehensive approach that is firmly rooted in the Charter of the United Nations.
Allow me to highlight a few points.
The future of the multilateral system and rules-based order is in all our hands. We shall not allow their selective application or disregard for global norms. The alternative is a terrifying world where force prevails and law perishes.
It is already the third year of Russia’s unprovoked full-scale war of aggression against Ukraine. Russia is still testing the global community’s resilience and commitment to the rules-based order. This war gravely affects the stability of the region and beyond. It has far-reaching consequences for the principles that uphold sovereignty, territorial integrity and international law. We must ensure that the global order remains resilient in the face of aggression, especially when the aggressor is a nuclear-weapon State and a permanent member of the Security Council.
Russia is trying to tear down what has been built by all of us. Russia is trying to rearrange the international system to benefit only aggressors. Having endured 50 years of Soviet occupation, Latvia deeply understands the value of freedom and independence, as do many other countries represented in the Assembly Hall. Latvia stands by Ukraine.
We continue to call for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all Russian troops and military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine. There can be no compromise regarding Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Russia’s unprovoked attack has widespread consequences beyond Ukraine’s borders. It impacts global food security, nuclear safety and the humanitarian situation.
Access to food is a human right. Hunger must never be used as a political tool. Latvia stands in solidarity with the countries most affected by the food crisis. Latvia has supported grain initiatives and released fertilizer cargoes. We are implementing partnerships for safe and responsible food production in Africa and Central Asia.
Children’s rights are human rights. Forcible deportations and illegal adoptions of Ukrainian children by Russia are of serious concern. We call on the United Nations to take a more active stand on that issue. We will contribute to the return of Ukrainian children and their recovery, to the best of our ability.
The right to life, liberty and security is also a human right. Russia continues to deliberately target civilian and critical infrastructure. Its brutal attacks are supported by Belarus, Iran and North Korea. In response, we are determined to help Ukraine in its fight and in rebuilding what has been brutally destroyed.
I call on all Members of the United Nations to support and join the communiqué adopted at the Summit on Peace in Ukraine, held in Switzerland, and to start building a peace process based on the United Nations Charter principles. Russia must bear full legal and financial responsibility for its aggression, and we must spare no effort to ensure comprehensive accountability for all crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine. It will be crucial to support and strengthen the institutions that investigate and prosecute those crimes, as well as to provide justice for the victims and uphold the rule of law. The establishment of a special tribunal that would be able to prosecute the main perpetrators of the crime of aggression would ensure full accountability, and I encourage other countries to support that proposal.
Our attention remains focused on the crisis in the Middle East. Tragically, innocent civilians, including countless children, are bearing the brunt of that crisis. It is imperative for the international community — the United Nations — to support efforts that ensure the protection of all civilians and work towards a durable resolution. Latvia, together with other European Union member States, has called for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, the unconditional release of all hostages and the provision of humanitarian access at scale. That is crucial to preventing a deepening of the crisis and a regional spillover. We remain hopeful that progress towards ending the hostilities can soon be achieved. We condemn all terrorist attacks on Israel. We recognize Israel’s legitimate right to self-defence, but it must be exercised in line with international law, specifically international humanitarian law — the law that has been put in place to protect all civilians. We must also focus on revitalizing the political process, with a view to breaking the cycle of violence and striving for a just and lasting peace. That peace must address the legitimate aspirations and security concerns of both Israelis and Palestinians. The ongoing escalation reinforces the necessity of pursuing a two-State solution in accordance with international parameters.
The United Nations is a place where no country’s voice can be drowned out by Powers with greater resources. The United Nations commitment to the principles of peace and security, justice and human rights empowers us to address challenges that we cannot otherwise tackle alone, and the importance of acting in solidarity for sustainable and inclusive development is clearer than ever. The Summit of the Future has demonstrated our renewed commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals. It accelerates our efforts to eradicate poverty, reduce inequalities and ensure environmental sustainability. The right path towards progress and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals is through advancing innovation and a science-based and environmentally friendly economy, enhancing the quality of education, strengthening governance and engaging with women, young people and the non-governmental sector on those issues. Latvia has already progressed towards achieving 63 per cent of the set targets and is also helping those most in need. Our development cooperation policy has become more global and more tangible, increasing year by year.
There can be no sustainable development without peace and consistent global action on climate change. The ongoing conflicts and crises around the world are aggravating the effects of climate change. We strongly believe that the Security Council must address climate change as an existential risk to global peace and security. Small island developing States are at the forefront of global environmental crises. In that regard, Latvia welcomes the recent advisory opinion on climate change and international law issued by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. We are also closely following the International Law Commission’s deliberations aimed at clarifying the impact of sea level rise on statehood.
Latvia has meaningful experience in building resilience to disinformation and promoting media literacy. We support an online environment that is free and open but also safe and secure. The rising capabilities of artificial intelligence provide a lot of opportunities for growth and development, but the potential for their misuse is a concern.
Latvia also remains increasingly engaged in peacebuilding and prevention in both word and deed. That includes our continuing provision of voluntary financial support to and participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions, as well as our support to the women and peace and security agenda.
The United Nations is not without flaws. Its ability to prevent aggression or resolve conflicts has frequently been questioned. We must acknowledge the shortcomings and address them effectively. Latvia strongly supports the revitalization of the United Nations system and reform of the Security Council. The number of permanent members on the Council must be expanded to make it more effective, inclusive and accountable and to elevate the voice of underrepresented regions. It is high time for Africa to have a permanent presence at the Council table. The continent has been neglected for far too long, and that must change. Furthermore, the small island developing States deserve a non-permanent seat on the Council. Their voices must be heard, especially given the existential threats they are facing. The decision-making process should be revisited as well. No single State should have veto power in the Security Council, especially when it comes to conflicts that permanent members are themselves involved in. That is how to ensure that the Council’s permanent members uphold their responsibility to protect peace and security.
The United Nations was once a beacon of hope for the people, but not anymore. We must change that. We must rebuild trust and common values. And we can do that only by working together. Latvia is fully prepared to assume its part of that responsibility. Latvia is running for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council in the 2025 elections for the first time. We stand ready to re-energize that international organ.
