I am pleased to congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on his election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and to wish him every success in fulfilling his mandate. I want to thank his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for his work in making the Assembly’s previous session a success. I also want to take this opportunity to reaffirm the Kingdom of Morocco’s full support for the efforts of Secretary-General António Guterres to enable our Organization to rise to our global challenges, especially his initiative to hold the Summit of the Future (see A/79/PV.3).
Every year, we gather here to find ourselves faced with rapid, complex developments in the international context, which we discuss and exchange views on. In the face of our societies’ changing needs and the challenges confronting our countries, the rapidly occurring changes at the level of social media, information technology and artificial intelligence are significant and interconnected. The issue of collective security that was the raison d’être of the United Nations has given way to uncertainty focused on other areas of human activity. We now face the challenges of redefining our own production and consumption methods, our governance models, even the very structures of our societies. His Majesty King Mohammed VI affirmed that in a message to the participants in the annual meetings of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund, held in Marrakech, when he said,
“At a time when our planet is facing climate change, which has imposed a new reality that the data is confirming every day, the world is still mired in problems that until recently we thought were resolved, in large part through the rules and multilateral organizations created in the wake of the Second World War.” We should therefore ask ourselves if multilateralism has reached its limit. Is it now time to come up with alternatives to global governance? Must we choose between multilateral action and the many ideals that bring us together?
Morocco has based its multilateral diplomatic doctrine on the high directives of King Mohammed, premised on ambition, clarity, innovation and realism. It is designed to ensure cooperation with our traditional partners. It also enables us to build necessary frameworks with new partners, based on the principles of effective solidarity and the sharing of experience and benefits, with the fundamental imperative of meeting our security, development and stability challenges at the same time.
For the Kingdom of Morocco, multilateral action has not been and never will be based on outdated idealism or short-term opportunism. Despite all its failures and shortcomings, multilateral action is still the only way to address our collective challenges and major threats. But it is no longer enough merely to reflect on the failures of multilateral action and declare our intention to reform it. We need to give that reform new impetus by mobilizing all segments of society, especially women and young people. In the wake of the Summit of the Future, we cannot move forward towards our future without bringing all those sectors on board with a view to crystallizing the shape and content of future comprehensive multilateral action. Similarly, we consider multilateral action a tool for developing countries to defend their interests and focus on their national priorities in order to benefit from cooperation opportunities and share experience and expertise.
One of the major challenges facing our planet is climate change, and the facts tell us that it is African countries that are most affected by its impacts while themselves making only a minor contribution to that climate change. On top of that, African countries have to allocate large portions of their revenues to pay down debts. We therefore believe that the relevant lending frameworks and rules should be changed to take account of the constraints that African States labour under when it comes to adapting to climate change. The Kingdom of Morocco therefore calls for creating innovative financing mechanisms that can enhance the positive impact of climate funds so as to resolve such debt crises. And we should accelerate the work of reforming the international financial architecture in order to meet the needs of developing countries by facilitating access to equitable loans that guarantee investment in their development. We also call for better representation of African countries on the governing boards of the World Bank and other multilateral banks in order to make them more democratic. We need to take a productive approach in this area, since debt crises are having a major negative impact on the economies of African countries. That is why Morocco, which has led the Like-Minded Countries Supporters of Middle-Income Countries for the past two years in New York, continues to call for multilateral actions capable of maintaining the development momentum that those countries have been able to achieve.
Guided by King Mohammed’s insightful vision, the Kingdom of Morocco continues to call for realistic, collective and pragmatic multilateralism to meet the needs of the African continent through effective decision-making mechanisms. That is the approach adopted and implemented by the Kingdom of Morocco in areas such as climate change adaptation, migration and the fight against terrorism. We are also working to implement social justice by organizing structured workshops for streamlining coverage, which we have funded in the amount of 29 billion Moroccan dirhams, an initiative that benefits millions of people through direct social assistance.
In affirming Morocco’s Atlantic-facing policy, based on our steadfast belief that the Atlantic coast will become a space for human communication, economic integration and a truly continental and international hub, King Mohammed has sought to strengthen the ties of integration and cooperation among African countries that share the Atlantic coast through the Rabat Process for African Atlantic States. That initiative is in keeping with the policy of cooperation among countries of the South and is aimed at demonstrating solidarity so as to make the Atlantic African space an area of peace, stability and development. The King has also launched an ambitious initiative aimed at enhancing coastal countries’ access to the Atlantic, based on his belief that the region has every right to participate in the global economy. That pioneering royal initiative is designed to be a pillar of prosperity, peace and stability for that part of the continent. And it is in the same spirit of solidarity that we are planning the construction of a future Morocco-Nigeria gas pipeline, a project for regional integration and economic revitalization aimed at promoting development along the Atlantic coast with the participation of 13 African countries. While our continent can depend on the wisdom of its leaders and the creativity of its young people, it needs increased solidarity and cooperation from the international community to face its challenges.
The Kingdom of Morocco remains committed to the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. We are therefore committed to reaching a definitive political solution to the regional dispute over the Moroccan Sahara — based exclusively on Morocco’s initiative for autonomy and within the framework of our territorial integrity and national sovereignty — that will open up new opportunities for development in the region. The consistent and growing support of many countries for Morocco’s sovereignty over its Sahara and for the Moroccan initiative for autonomy sends a clear message to other parties and to the United Nations that it is time to advance a political solution on that basis through the round tables that have been organized and in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In that context, Morocco supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara to relaunch the political round tables with the participation of the four parties concerned, in order to achieve a realistic, practical, lasting and consensus-based political solution, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2703 (2023).
In that regard, we reiterate Morocco’s position, which King Mohammed has reaffirmed to the Secretary-General, that there can be no political process on this issue outside the framework of the round tables set by the United Nations, with the full participation of Algeria, and no solution outside the framework of the Moroccan autonomy initiative. Nor can there be any serious political process unless the armed militias return to a ceasefire, as the members of the Security Council have called for. At the same time, the Moroccan Sahara is currently experiencing one of our country’s highest rates of development, thanks to projects being carried out under our new development model for the southern provinces. Through their democratically elected representatives on the regional councils, the people of the region are fully involved in every stage of the implementation of that ambitious political decision-making framework, and their active participation in Moroccan political, economic and social life demonstrates their firm attachment to Morocco’s territorial integrity and the Moroccan character of the Western Sahara.
In his speech on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of his accession to the throne, King Mohammed reiterated that our focus on our country’s internal situation has not made us forget the tragedy that our brother Palestinian people are enduring. In that context, my country joins other Islamic and Arab States in expressing our deep concern about the dangerous and unprecedented situation that has prevailed in the occupied Palestinian territory since October 2023, in which thousands of civilians, mostly children and women, have been killed and injured, in addition to the massive destruction of Gaza and the total blockade imposed on it, in flagrant violation of international laws and humanitarian values. King Mohammed has outlined his vision for replacing the logic of crisis management with the logic of working to find a definitive solution to the conflict that includes the following elements.
First, while ending the war in Gaza is an urgent priority, it must go hand in hand with the opening of a political horizon that will lead to the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region. Secondly, ensuring the conduct of negotiations to revive the peace process between the Palestinian and Israeli parties requires combating extremism on any side. Thirdly, security and stability in the region can be established only within the framework of a two-State solution whereby Gaza is an integral part of the territory of an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
On the humanitarian front, in his capacity as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, King Mohammed has worked to ensure the opening of an unimpeded land route for the delivery of urgent food and medical assistance to the people of Gaza.
The Kingdom of Morocco also expresses its deep concern about the recent developments in the Middle East. All the indications suggest that we are facing a truly unprecedented situation that could lead to a spillover of the conflict, which could plunge the entire region into an unpredictable phase with unpredictable repercussions. King Mohammed has repeatedly stressed that the lack of a political horizon in the context of the Palestinian question is one of the most important factors fuelling the conflict in the Middle East, and he has warned against continuing to manage the Israeli-Palestinian conflict without a realistic and sustainable solution. Continuing in this way has led to frustration, disappointment and a succession of devastating catastrophes with humanitarian consequences, and it has had dangerous repercussions for stability and peace in the Middle East and international peace and security. I would like to express Morocco’s full solidarity with the people and the Government of Lebanon regarding the aggression to which Lebanon has been subjected, and to demand that its territorial integrity and national sovereignty be respected.
The enormous number of global challenges that we are facing makes it essential that we mobilize our collective conscience, improve our working methods and strengthen our fundamental values. The United Nations today faces the task of restoring the spirit of active solidarity, collective responsibility and genuine humanitarianism on which it was built, and of addressing decisively the question of reform as we approach the celebration of the eightieth anniversary of our Organization. The Summit of the Future held at the beginning of this session (see A/79/PV.3), the upcoming Second World Summit for Social Development 2025 and the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are all visions of a shared future and road maps that must be implemented so that we can work collectively to prevent any further delays in the development agenda.
