Almost 80 years ago, the Charter of the United Nations came into being, laying the foundations of our Organization to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Its founders believed firmly that no power was more legitimate than that collectively entrusted to this new international Organization. And in the past two days, alongside many of us here, and at the initiative of the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, I have taken part in the Summit of the Future (see A/79/PV.5). Between hope and concern, the Summit enabled us to measure the immensity of the work that is still to be done if we are to ensure a harmonious and peaceful future for our children.
At a time when we are facing a growing number of challenges, we are witnessing an increase in regional conflicts, a resumption of the arms race and nuclear proliferation and a sharp decline in collective security. The extreme violence of conflicts today and the thousands of victims they are claiming around the world is intolerable. Targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure, including schools and hospitals, are flagrant violations of the fundamental principles of international humanitarian law. Similarly, the use of famine as a weapon of war is a heinous crime. Such acts must not go unpunished. Whatever the conflict or the continent where it takes place, international justice must pursue every crime that is committed and bring the guilty to justice. That is an essential prerequisite for building a just and lasting peace in the long term.
The dividing up of the world that we are witnessing is very disturbing. This should not be a time for war and division but for building coalitions for concrete action and intensifying cooperation, solidarity, mutual aid and dialogue. My country has always believed that multilateralism is the only way forward. The United Nations is at the heart of multilateralism, and it is up to us to implement the road map that we have collectively adopted. As we pledged last year at the Sustainable Development Goals Summit, and again yesterday at the Summit of the Future, we must turn away from the path of destruction and focus on the path to prosperity. The New Agenda for Peace has mapped out a path to help us show greater solidarity and rebuild trust. A number of milestones have already been reached, pointing the way for the near future. Next year’s fourth International Conference on Financing for Development calls on us to rethink the international financial architecture to help countries take more sustainable and inclusive paths to development. The World Social Summit, also to be held next year, should provide the impetus needed to achieve greater social justice and contribute to the fight against poverty, Goal 1 of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Sustainable development as a whole cannot achieve the desired effects if it does not include women and girls. In 2025, as we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security and the thirtieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, it is clear that gender equality has still not been achieved, even though it represents equality of rights, responsibilities and opportunities. It is only by guaranteeing women’s rights in all the Sustainable Development Goals and the actions of the Pact for the Future that we will achieve greater justice and inclusion. Step by step, at whatever the cost, we must maintain our efforts to promote women’s rights and ensure gender equality.
Let us make no mistake. The challenges that pose the greatest threat to humankind in the long term are unquestionably linked to the multidimensional environmental crisis that we are experiencing, for which, I need hardly remind everyone, we are primarily responsible. Climate change, declining biodiversity and ecosystems and the multiple forms of pollution that affect both land and the ocean — the cradle of life — are disrupting the daily lives of millions of people and inflicting considerable economic losses. Faced with this tragedy of the commons, we cannot give in to doubt or despondency. Of course we have to be clear-sighted about the scale of the tasks ahead, but that should not prevent us from being optimistic and having faith in the future. We now have several major international instruments to guide us through the storm — the Paris Climate Agreement, the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ) and soon, I hope, a new international agreement to combat plastic pollution worldwide.
The crisis facing us requires a coordinated response. When we take part in the various international forums planned for the coming months, let us therefore bear in mind the need for united and concerted action. The first of these is in Colombia, at the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, where expectations are high and reflect the many challenges we face in implementing the Biodiversity Plan and realizing our 2050 vision of living in harmony with nature. At the end of the year in Baku, at the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, we will set a new collective climate finance target for developing countries that must meet the immense needs, while remaining realistic and operational.
Creating the conditions to guarantee the right to a future in a healthy environment requires ending upheavals in our ecosystems, with the support of science, but also with the knowledge and expertise of the women and men on the ground who are already suffering the consequences of those changes. I am thinking specifically about small island developing States, which are particularly vulnerable to the effects of sea level rise. The possible disappearance of habitable and productive areas in those States is a genuine threat to their existence.
The Principality of Monaco and its institutions, committed to preserving the oceans, are supporting the project to establish an international group of experts for the International Platform for Ocean Sustainability to be led by UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission. In that regard, as we move forward in the Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development, 2021–2030, I call on all States to accelerate the ratification process of the BBNJ Agreement, in the hope that it can enter into force in 2025, an important year for the planet with the holding of the third United Nations Ocean Conference in Nice, France. The Conference should make it possible to accelerate our actions and mobilize all actors so as to provide the sustainable solutions that the ocean needs to meet the challenges we are facing. The blue economy also has a role in this area, and the Principality intends to actively play its part by welcoming the Blue Economy and Finance Forum on 7 and 8 June 2025. Lastly, beyond the framework offered by the BBNJ Agreement, I reaffirm my country’s commitment to the establishment of solid regulations, based on the best scientific data, that guarantee the effective protection of the marine environment before any mineral exploitation of the deep seabed. These interconnected crises compel us to fundamentally rethink our relationship with nature, which is essential to our survival and welfare.
Amid the challenges and changes facing humankind, the development of artificial intelligence seems inevitable. The emergence and development of this new technology in our daily lives come with opportunities that we must seize, as well as dangers that we must guard against. The Principality of Monaco is committed to capitalizing on the opportunities provided by safe, secure and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems for sustainable development. The rapid technological advances we are witnessing can both accelerate development and provide fertile ground for organized crime and terrorism. It is now up to the international community to establish appropriate standards to ensure that the technology is used ethically, respects everyone’s human rights and fundamental freedoms and cannot be misused for military or terrorist purposes.
Apart from that, disinformation represents one of the most insidious threats to our societies today. It is spreading rapidly, fuelled by social media and digital platforms, sowing confusion and eroding trust in institutions and the media. The consequences of manipulating information are serious and can extend to destabilizing our States and exacerbating international tensions. It is therefore essential to strengthen fact-checking mechanisms to protect the truth and preserve the health of our democracies.
We have the necessary tools, whether legal, technological or scientific, to provide sustainable and effective solutions to today’s challenges. The Pact for the Future and the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations in 2025 are a historic and unique opportunity for us to advance the intergovernmental process on Security Council reform in order to make our Organization more inclusive and representative of current realities and resolve the crises we face. While the Olympic and Paralympic Games in Paris were a major success, the athletes showed us that effort and perseverance, even in the face of adversity, lead to victory. They have humbly taught us that while victory is the ultimate goal, the path we have travelled and reciprocal competition are equally important achievements. Let us therefore be committed to the process we have defined, together and with determination. Step by step, let us overcome our obstacles without ever losing sight of our objective — that of preserving peace among nations and ensuring the welfare of the peoples of the United Nations.
