Driven by a deep sense of honour and responsibility, I address the Assembly today strong in the mandate entrusted to me by Mr. Andry Rajoelina, President of the Republic of Madagascar, and on behalf of the Malagasy people.
I welcome the election of Mr. Philemon Yang as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. His exemplary career and deep knowledge of international issues are invaluable assets in guiding our work. He can rest assured of the support of Madagascar, in its capacity as newly elected Vice-President of the General Assembly for the 2024-2025 term, in the accomplishment of his mission.
The theme chosen for this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, resonates with particular acuity in these times of serious uncertainties in and for the world. How powerfully that reminds us today of the interconnectedness of global challenges and the need for a collective, united and resolute response. Indeed, peace, the fragile foundation of a world plagued by divisions, is today undermined by a multiplicity of crises with dangerous and deep geostrategic ramifications. Far from being a regionalized conflict, the war in Ukraine is shaking the international order, exacerbating geopolitical tensions, heightening food and energy insecurity and endangering global peace and security.
Terrorism and transnational crime continue to sow terror and desolation, disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable populations. The proliferation of weapons and drugs, particularly in conflict zones, fuels a vicious cycle of violence and instability, thereby hampering long-term development efforts and mortgaging the future of entire generations.
The climate emergency has become a tangible and devastating reality. The increase in extreme weather events, the degradation of ecosystems and the loss of biodiversity are all warning signs that must push us to act with determination and speed.
Growing inequalities on an international scale are fertile ground for social tensions, conflicts and instability. The coronavirus disease pandemic, far from being a great leveller, has exacerbated existing fractures, highlighting the vulnerability of health-care and social protection systems in many countries and further widening the gap between rich and developing countries.
Faced with those threats, we cannot give in to fear or resignation. Multilateralism, embodied by the United Nations, remains our best weapon and our collective instrument for building a safer and more peaceful world. However, and unfortunately, it is clear that the current multilateral system, dating back to the post-war period, is struggling to respond effectively to the challenges of a rapidly and profoundly changing world. A courageous and ambitious reform of the United Nations, particularly of the Security Council, is more essential than ever. Africa, a continent in full demographic and economic growth, cannot remain on the periphery of global decision-making centres.
The effective implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the strengthening of commitments to reducing greenhouse gas emissions are categorical imperatives for safeguarding the future of our planet and guaranteeing the well-being of future generations. To that end, the President of the Republic of Madagascar, Mr. Andry Rajoelina, recalled in his speech at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Glasgow in September 2022, the need to accelerate the mobilization of $100 billion from the Paris Agreement to finance an energy transition policy in Africa. The fight against climate change cannot therefore be disassociated from the issue of development. It is imperative to support developing countries in their transition to a green and resilient economy by providing them with adequate financial and technological resources and by recognizing their right to development.
It is imperative and urgent to promote a more inclusive and equitable model of world development that leaves no one behind. It is time to move from words to action. It is time to translate our commitments into concrete actions, especially for Africa, by investing massively in education, health care, drinking water, social protection for all, infrastructure, innovation and job creation, especially for young people and women. If we aspire to inclusive multilateralism, it is time to promote fairer and more equitable international trade and to promote and guarantee equitable access to knowledge, technologies and fairer financing and investment systems. Social justice and lasting peace in the world depend on it.
Madagascar, aware of those global challenges and the urgency of providing concerted and lasting solutions, is committed with determination, alongside the United Nations and its Member States, to build a fairer, more united and more sustainable world. The culture of Fihavanana, the art of living together deeply rooted in Malagasy culture, guides our action. It reflects our deep aspiration to live in harmony, mutual respect and solidarity, ensuring that no one is left behind and never forgetting the most vulnerable, thus working towards a fairer society.
The general policy of the State of Madagascar, reflecting the vision of Mr. Andry Rajoelina, President of the Republic, makes human capital the first pillar of development. Over the past five years, Madagascar has invested heavily in education and teaching, health care and family planning, security, innovative and inclusive social programmes, the fight against malnutrition, and infrastructure to catch up on development and break the vicious circle of poverty. The country continues to invest heavily in those areas, which constitute the basic pillar of our action for human development.
True to its tradition as a country with a peaceful and tolerant people, Madagascar has made democracy, respect for the rule of law and good governance crucial tools for maintaining stability, strengthening peace and security and consolidating its path toward sustainable development. Of course, that explicitly and amply justifies the Global Peace Index ranking of Madagascar in second place among the most peaceful countries in sub-Saharan Africa in 2024.
Certainly, the challenges are numerous for my country; nevertheless, the leadership of Mr. Andry Rajoelina, President of the Republic, is living up to the hopes of my fellow citizens, who have given him a new mandate in 2024 for the agricultural and industrial transformation of Madagascar in order to create more jobs and decent incomes for young people and rural people, to generate more added value for the Malagasy economy and to establish more peace and sustainable development for the country. Today Madagascar is the third-largest rice producing country in Africa, but aspires to become the first, through the Government’s new political orientation of rural development, by focusing on the optimal exploitation of all the rice basins of the country; on new knowledge and technologies in the use of agricultural inputs by all farmers and improving irrigation infrastructure in order to double or even triple productivity in the short term; and on agricultural aggregation to better attract private investment in the intensive production of rice and other agricultural speculations, such as potatoes, dry grains and others.
In relation to development challenges, Madagascar intends to strengthen its tireless efforts to improve its road network, in particular by building the Route du Soleil, linking all the regions of the eastern side of the big island. That will further generate growth in public and private investments, the fluidity of trade, the promotion of tourism in the regions, the accelerated transformation of regional economies, and the strengthening of peace and security in the country.
Those efforts with respect to our road network are part of the Government’s priority action to build major structural projects for my country. Renewable energy is therefore among the priorities to which my Government is committed today in carrying out its industrialization plan and multiple actions to improve the living conditions of the population, particularly the rural population, by substantially and sustainably reducing the State subsidy of the cost of electricity production so as to allocate it judiciously to development projects. To that end, we are currently accelerating the implementation of a solar parks initiative for 47 districts across the country and the start of construction on several hydroelectric power plants and solar power plants with private investors and development partners, which could achieve an additional production of nearly 500 megawatts over the next four to five years. Our objective is to double the contributions of the agricultural and industrial sectors to Madagascar’s gross domestic product in order to generate real growth that creates jobs and sustainable income for young people and rural inhabitants, thereby transforming the economy and substantially reducing poverty for a new development boom for the big island.
Aware of the threats of climate change to peace, security and development, Madagascar, although a low emitter of greenhouse gases, is among the countries most vulnerable to the effects of climate change, suffering the full brunt of cyclones, drought, coastal erosion and loss of biodiversity. That threatens to significantly reduce or even destroy the economic and social progress generated by the agricultural and industrial transformations currently being driven by the country. As Madagascar is one of the rare countries that are saving the planet, with a negative carbon footprint thanks to our forests, one of the true green lungs of the African continent, I urge the international community to intensify and accelerate financing for climate adaptation for all vulnerable countries, particularly island countries like Madagascar. Madagascar is thus determined to preserve that precious natural heritage for future generations.
In conclusion, Madagascar calls more than ever for a strengthened and fairer multilateralism, a multilateralism based on dialogue, cooperation and solidarity. Madagascar will continue to work tirelessly, alongside the United Nations and its Member States, to build a world of peace, development and dignity for all.
