I congratulate the President on his assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly. We also extend our appreciation to his predecessor for his strong leadership and our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts in steering the Secretariat.
We gather here today at a delicate moment in global history. Let us not mince words. Humankind is in deep trouble, facing an ever-growing list of crises — conflict, poverty, hunger, climate change, the wealth gap, the cost-of-living crisis, migrations, occupations, opioid addiction — and the list goes on and on. In fact, I have a map here of the world on which the countries facing some sort of crisis are marked in red. Does anyone see any countries shown in green, indicating that they are not facing any crises? Does anyone know why not? It is because we are all deep in the red. Humankind is in crisis, and in many cases the crises are human-made. But we keep looking the other way, continuing with business as usual. While the alarms are ringing, the band is still playing the same old tunes as the whole ship sinks deeper and deeper into uncharted waters. We need nations united in harmony — not a United Nations in misery.
These are crucial times for the world, and important years for my country. In 2040, the Maldives will celebrate 75 years since it regained its independence, and 75 years as a sovereign nation. As we look forward to that milestone in our nation’s life, what can we hope to achieve? What do we wish to accomplish? And is the world ready to play its part? I took office as the President of Maldives last November, duty-bound by the aspirations of my people. I hold dear in my heart those same aspirations — not just for the present, but for the future too. Today I am here at the United Nations with a vision of where I want to take my country. By 2040, I want to see the Maldives as a fully-fledged developed nation that commands respect, is relevant and embodies resilience, with a society that is inclusive and just — a country that exemplifies sustainability and democratic governance.
Destiny is not mere fate. It is a consequence of the many choices we make, the many decisions we take and the many hours we work. Becoming a developed nation may seem like a daunting task and a distant possibility. But I can say this — with a goal in sight and a plan in hand, it is achievable, because prevailing, and even flourishing, against formidable odds is nothing new for Maldivians. In 1965, when we regained our independence, we were one of the poorest countries in the world. One third of our population was illiterate. More than one in every 10 babies were dying before their first birthday. We had no industries, barely any exports and even fewer prospects. And in just five decades, we have reached upper-middle-income status, a feat that we are incredibly proud of.
I believe that the Maldives can become a developed country by investing in its productive capacity and increasing its productivity, by transforming its economy into one that is fully digitized and driven by artificial intelligence (AI) and, most importantly, by leveraging its natural beauty and marine resources. Boosting productivity will be the key to our economic transformation. We will do that by reforming and strengthening our institutions, increasing our State capacity and leveraging the private sector. We will also identify and implement policies that support investments in key sectors, such as the digital economy.
The Maldives has more than 1,100 islands, spread across 90,000 square kilometres. Enhancing digital connectivity is key to achieving inclusive development, mobilizing economic activity and fostering a more diversified and resilient economy. We believe that the future is intelligence-driven. That is why we are working towards a digital economy that can contribute as much as 15 per cent of our gross domestic product by 2030. That can be achieved through investing in our information and communications technologies infrastructure. We are using and expanding artificial intelligence systems to deliver essential services such as healthcare, education and social welfare. We are also delving into cutting-edge applications of 5G technology, using drones for delivering medical supplies, implementing smart road systems and using AI-enhanced technology for detecting erosion and monitoring the environment.
The transformation can be sustainable only if we transform our education and financial systems. We need to invest in people’s digital literacy from a young age to build a generation that can use artificial intelligence to enhance the delivery of public services, build new products and compete successfully in the global digital economy. We need to bridge the digital divides within our country, including by improving the collection and utilization of data. We need to strengthen our regulatory frameworks, bolster existing institutions, cultivate start-up ecosystems and provide the impetus for the future we envision.
Becoming a developed country will also require fostering new industries. That is why we are working on building a robust financial sector in the Maldives. With that in mind, in May this year I set up the Development Bank of Maldives, with a focus on improving and investing in economic diversification. The result we desire is inclusive development, where equality of access to opportunities is guaranteed, women and young people are key players in our development, not mere spectators, and every Maldivian citizen has adequate housing. To support those objectives, my Government has launched a $6.5 million loan facility specifically for women entrepreneurs, and 25 per cent of the funds are allocated to those with disabilities. In the first phase, more than 100 projects will be funded across 19 of the 20 atolls and Malé and across 21 business activities. I have also recently launched a presidential youth advisory board, which will advise and inform me directly on the needs and views of young people.
Inclusivity is at the heart of one of the most ambitious, large-scale urban development projects in the country’s history — Ras Malé. It is my promise to the Maldivian people, a solution for alleviating the long-term housing crisis with an urban oasis where citizens can fully participate in all aspects of city life. Ras Malé will utilize modular housing and leverage a state-of-the-art transportation system that is accessible to all. It will be developed as a climate-resilient and safe island.
Tourism drives the Maldivian economy. My vision is to expand the tourism sector further, which means building complementary industries centred around innovation and creativity. That means more sustainable construction practices, with an emphasis on green and sustainable tourism. We are also expanding our main international airport, our air connectivity and our national airline fleet. Those steps will support expansion of the tourism sector and generate more revenue for the country at the same time.
But tourism is also highly vulnerable to external shocks. Conflicts, calamities and causes beyond our control can have — and have had — far-reaching, critical implications in the past. We need the international system to anticipate and address those threats, such as armed conflict, terrorism, violent extremism, transnational organized crime, climate change and ocean degradation and other crimes that transcend national borders. Part of addressing those threats is safeguarding and protecting people’s fundamental rights. In 2015, the world came together to endorse humankind’s fundamental rights by committing to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). But six years from the SDG deadline, we are on track for less than a fifth of those targets. In June the Organization issued The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024, stating that the world is failing to deliver on the Goals.
This week, we agreed on the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1). But do we want that document — the Pact — to go the same way as the 2015 SDG commitment? I am sorry, but we cannot keep doing that. We cannot keep meeting, talking and pledging but not doing. We do not want these days — days when we had a chance, but not the will — to come back to haunt us. We believe that the best approach to protecting fundamental rights is to cultivate a culture of respect. That requires support.
The Maldives has a good track record of treaty ratification, implementation and reporting. We champion the right to a healthy environment because we are keenly aware of the consequences of environmental degradation. We also believe that the violation of a right by any country — large or small, rich or poor, with powerful friends or none — must not be tolerated. That is why the ongoing massacre — the genocide — by Israel in Gaza is a travesty of justice and the international system. We are witnessing the repeated destruction of homes, hospitals, schools and humanitarian infrastructure and repeated cycles of killings of men, women, children and babies — thousands upon thousands. The world is struggling to process the deaths of so many civilians in Gaza, and now Israeli raids in Lebanon are claiming hundreds more civilian lives there. Their cries will haunt anyone with humanity. Their tears are bitter on our conscience. Israel is targeting journalists, the eyes and ears of humankind. How can we interpret the killing of journalists — Palestinian journalists, Lebanese journalists, Al Jazeera journalists — and even the closure of Al Jazeera’s offices as anything other than brutal attempts to prevent the world from knowing about the crimes taking place? Israel must be held accountable for those acts of terrorism and violations of international law and United Nations resolutions.
We must accept a sovereign and independent Palestinian State on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We welcome the decision to seat our brothers and sisters from Palestine for the first time here with us in the General Assembly, instead of behind us. Now we must ensure that Palestine becomes a full member of the United Nations.
The Maldives is gearing up for an economic transformation that will change lives. But our policies can deliver the results only with sufficient international financial support. The Maldives has always taken ownership and responsibility for its own development. While we have received extensive support towards that development, we urge the multilateral development funds, banks and bilateral donor to view us as their partners, not just recipients of aid. We urge them to stop looking at our inherent vulnerabilities as limitations, to adopt tailor-made approaches that are mutually beneficial, to reduce the cost of borrowing. We ask them to make the financial system work for us, rather than penalizing us. We urge them to make their terms flexible, their financing less rigid and their lending targeted, affordable and responsible.
Climate change is the most serious threat to our world and the defining challenge of our generation. It is washing away decades of progress in mere minutes. It is diverting already depleted resources from long-term development to emergency relief and reconstruction, preventing countries from adapting to climate impacts. And the vicious cycle continues. The Maldives has always walked the talk. We are investing in renewable energy. Our goal is to have 33 per cent of the country’s electricity demands met from renewable energy sources by 2028. On behalf of the Maldivian people, I implore the Assembly to do its part and act now. We must face the climate emergency head-on, with science, determination and resources. The rich and emitting countries need to meet the financial pledges they have already made, especially on adaptation, where the financing gap continues to widen. As we work towards the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, we must ensure that the new goal for climate finance matches the level of climate action required. That means that it must go beyond $100 billion. At a minimum it must include loss and damage response, mitigation and adaptation as sub-goals.
One of the biggest victims of the climate crisis is the ocean. The Maldivian people and their livelihoods are dependent on the health and wealth of the ocean. We need to step up efforts to sustainably use and manage our ocean resources, address plastic pollution, conserve biodiversity and protect endangered species. This morning I ratified the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction. We urge all Member States to do the same and to do their part to address climate change, overcome pollution and reverse biodiversity loss.
The transformation the Maldives seeks cannot be achieved without an enabling global environment. Small countries like mine need a multilateral system that champions us and delivers for us. The United Nations is the epitome of the multilateral system. It is well positioned to promote sustainable development, maintain peace and security, advance and protect human rights and enforce equality, the rule of law, inclusivity and representativeness. But what we are witnessing is the opposite — an inability to stop climate change and environmental degradation, war and genocide, exploitation and suffering and unequal representation. The United Nations therefore needs reform and revitalization. It needs to be representative. The Maldives cannot and will not stand idly by and watch while the multilateral system fails, because our development, advancement and survival are tethered to the world. That is why the Maldives is seeking election to the Economic and Social Council for the 2027– 2029 term, and we count on the Assembly’s support in that effort. If elected, the Maldives will strive to make the United Nations development system more relevant to our times, constantly recalibrating and adjusting, utilizing the latest science and evidence and listening to the various opinions and views. The United Nations must enforce its decisions across the United Nations system and at the local level. It is relevant only when it makes a real difference in our lives.
Fifty-nine years ago, the Maldives reached out to the United Nations as its first port in a sea of uncertainty. We came here to this great Hall, seeking recognition and a partner. We came to the United Nations as a poor and impoverished country, but with a vision for prosperity — a vision on which we made great progress with United Nations support. Today we come to the United Nations once again, aiming higher to reach further and do better, with a vision for making the Maldives a developed nation by 2040. For I believe that development is destiny, and our destiny beckons towards a brighter future for present and future generations.
