I bring the fraternal greetings of our President, Andrés Manuel López Obrador. I am honoured to return to the General Assembly, which was my home for many years, to address members as a representative of Mexico.
We are facing a change of era. Neoliberal hegemony has demonstrated its palpable failure by proposing an extractivist development model that socializes losses, privatizes profits, impoverishes people and devastates the planet. Arms races and wars have returned to international geopolitics. The devastation of the environment continues. Frustration and discontent are manifested in extremism and proposals that deny rights and deny democratic values. The institutions of the international system are losing legitimacy.
Secretary General António Guterres has referred to those phenomena as a “purgatory of polarity” and instability, which are symptoms of civilizational crises and of stages of transition in which the old does not finish dying and the new is not yet born. The similarities between our times and the interwar period of the past century are increasingly evident. They are also more worrisome, because we know the outcome of that time — terrible years in which the world’s production was transformed into a production line for war, on which humanity became one more input.
However, history also teaches us that in such crises it is possible, with courage and valour, to reverse that destructive fate. In the interwar period of the last century, Mexico’s foreign policy wrote an exceptional chapter. Deploying its characteristic humanism, solidarity and respect for international law, Mexico took on the task of defending the value of the League of Nations, justice and the self-determination, integrity, independence and equality of its members. Under those banners, we strongly condemned the arms race, the invasions of Manchuria, Austria and Asia, and the march of fascism in Europe. After the Second World War, Mexico led the declaration of Latin America and the Caribbean as a territory free of nuclear weapons.
Today as then, Mexico strives to build emancipatory alternatives. Ours is a homeland that guides its present under the banner of Mexican humanism, a product of our millennial history and the compass of our project of national transformation — the construction of a just, egalitarian and fraternal society and a moral economy that guarantees an equitable distribution of income and respect for the environment.
That revolution of conscience has allowed us, during the administration of President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, to reverse the degradation and precarity of the living conditions of our population. More than 9.5 million Mexicans have escaped poverty in five years, and the Gini coefficient has reached a historic low. The minimum wage has increased by 135 per cent, demolishing the inflationary myths preached as an absolute certainty by those who seek to maintain the status quo. Tax privileges have been eliminated, reinforcing public coffers and putting an end to corruption and tax evasion and avoidance. All those achievements, moreover, have occurred in a context of stability that has consolidated Mexico as an investment destination. Unprecedented actions have been taken at the constitutional level to recognize the rights of indigenous peoples, guarantee equality and political participation for women, and leave a manifest legacy of social victories in our Constitution so that no one can take them away from future generations.
Those premises are also reflected in our foreign policy. Mexico is a country of migrants, and no stage of the migration cycle is alien to us. Based on our experience, we launched the Mexican Model of Human Mobility, a proposal to manage migration in a comprehensive manner by addressing its structural causes and regional cooperation. The Model has four pillars. The first empowers Mexican communities abroad and promotes the adoption of paths for full regularization by the United States. The second strengthens and expands development cooperation in communities of origin and return. The third addresses political factors and economic sanctions that inhibit development and generate irregular migration. The fourth generates safe, orderly and regular paths for labour mobility.
We say this loudly so that it can be heard far away — migration is not a problem; it is a phenomenon. It is not a crime, and migrants are not criminals. The problem is the factors that drive them from their homes, the dangers to which they are exposed by not finding legal paths for mobility and the practices that criminalize them. From this rostrum, we rightly recognize the contributions of the more than 37 million Mexicans living in the United States, capable and honest workers who contribute $324 billion a year to its gross domestic product and who are indispensable to the economy of both countries. We have been able to change the narrative and the conversation with the United States to focus on structural causes with a regional perspective. We convened the leaders of the countries of origin in Palenque to strike strategic agreements that have been able to reduce encounters on the border between Mexico and the United States by 66 per cent.
We say this loudly too — development and stability will not be the norm of the international system if we do not guarantee the rights and inclusion of women. As the first country of the global South to adopt a feminist foreign policy, we hosted the third Ministerial Conference on Feminist Foreign Policy in June. In its declaration, the Conference recognized a series of commitments that are reflected in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1). This week, only 9 women Heads of State and Government have spoken from this rostrum — only 9 out of 133. The world cannot move forward without half of the population; no more about us without us, because the future will be feminist or it will not be.
Climate change, as Nicholas Stern has said, is the biggest market failure of all time and the greatest global challenge. The only way to mitigate it is through collective and simultaneous actions, which require financing and the fulfilment of the common but differentiated responsibilities of countries. We reiterate our commitment to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the implementation of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework and the achievement of synergies among the three agendas of the Rio Conventions. We propose to assess and restore the integrity of ecosystems as providers of essential goods and services for the economy and social well-being and climate stability.
We have participated in the consultative processes of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights and the International Court of Justice on the responsibility of States with regard to climate change. We will continue to work to achieve the ratification of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction and to maintain the moratorium on deep-sea mining.
The global security landscape is undergoing a profound transformation. We are alarmed by the growing and diverse threats to international peace and security, in particular violations of the purposes and principles of the Charter and the growing risks of nuclear war — the greatest threat ever faced by humankind. In the face of those scenarios, we defend territorial integrity in all geographic contexts, including in Ukraine and Palestine. We advocate a political solution and negotiations that include both parties, Russia and Ukraine. In this Hall, we applaud the initiative of Brazil and China on the formation of a peace group in New York. The war has lasted too long and affects us all. We all lose, other than the mercenaries of death, especially the arms companies, which profit from the pain and loss of millions of girls, boys and entire families.
Faced with that worrisome reality, it is imperative that we redouble our efforts to eliminate nuclear weapons. Their devastating effects, which cannot be contained in space or time, make them contrary to international law and the survival of humankind.
Firearms, too, are a source of violence and insecurity throughout the world. Mexico suffers from the illicit flow of more than half a million weapons into its territory each year. The arms industry needs to be held accountable for its negligence and Mexico has gone to court to that end, convinced that the arms industry is a key player in both the expansion and the solution of that phenomenon. Mexico knows well that the illegal flow of arms is the other side of the illegal flow of drugs and organized crime, especially on our country’s northern border.
Humanity is breaking down in Gaza in the face of the inaction of the international community. More than 70 per cent of the victims of that war have been children and women; more than 85 per cent of civilians have had to leave their homes. The majority of the population lacks access to food, water and electricity. Mexico has therefore asked to intervene in the case initiated by South Africa before the International Court of Justice on the application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Together with Chile, we referred the situation of Palestine to the International Criminal Court and submitted a friend of the Court brief to highlight the jurisdiction of the Court. We reject the false dichotomy between the sterile violence of terrorism and the disproportionate punishment of Governments sheltered by double standards.
In order to make the two-State solution a reality, it is critical to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations and the opinion of the International Court of Justice regarding the practices in occupied Palestinian territory. The institutions and rules that uphold our international system are the last line against barbarism. Therefore, we strongly condemn the flagrant violations by the current Government of Ecuador of the most basic norms of international coexistence and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, through its illegal and violent assault on our Embassy in Quito on the night of 5 April, its aggression against our diplomats and its illicit abductio n of a person to whom Mexico had granted political asylum and who remains imprisoned and seriously ill. We reiterate our gratitude for the widespread condemnation of that act and, as an international community, we cannot forget it or normalize it.
The Security Council needs urgent reform. Mexico proposes the elimination of the veto in its entirety and, until that is achieved, at the very least its limitation in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Latin America and the Caribbean, our natural region, is one of our top priorities, because the progress of any of our countries is the progress of all. In defence of dialogue, stability, democracy and the peaceful resolution of disputes, we have been the guarantor of the peace process between the Government of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. We have already hosted two rounds of negotiations. We have also sponsored dialogues between the Government of Venezuela, the Plataforma Unitaria Democrática and the United States.
Following the principles of solidarity, self-determination and the well-being of peoples, we will continue to be involved in supporting Haiti in rebuilding its stability and security.
We reiterate our condemnation of the economic blockade imposed on Cuba for six decades, in violation of international law, and call for the immediate removal of Cuba from the United States list of countries sponsoring terrorism.
Honouring the tradition of asylum in our history and regional law, Mexico has offered political asylum to people threatened with their lives, integrity and freedom, and has granted refuge to tens of thousands of asylum-seekers and complementary protection as a country that opens its doors to those who need it.
On 1 October, we will inaugurate the Administration of the first female President in 200 years of our Republic, Ms. Claudia Sheinbaum Pardo. Under her leadership, the humanist Government will deepen efforts to combat poverty and inequality and emphasize well-being, shared prosperity, women’s equality, protection of natural heritage and respect for the environment. As I have said, we will not do so on our own; we will all do it together. Our foreign policy will continue to deploy our highest values, relying on our roots and our struggles. We offer hope in the face of fear, solidarity in the face of hatred and the return of humanism in the face of devastation.
Ours is a world that today offers a landscape that devastates the soul. The citizens of our nations find little cause for optimism. Every day, our screens reproduce scenes of brutal cruelty and statistical, almost mechanical reports of the numbers of death. Many are those who look to the United Nations and legitimately hope that in these halls the intelligence and sensitivity of the world’s leaders will make the promise of our purpose a reality and that dialogue and diplomacy will succeed in stopping the failure of reason.
They are rightly frustrated to see that instead of fraternity, instead of the collective defence of human dignity, instead of the application of equitable norms and international law, factional geopolitical interests and shameful double standards are imposed. They see how, without the slightest shame, the empire of naked force persists, which is another way of saying the obscene concentration of power in a handful of the few who benefit from the status quo, of the privileged for whom the current dispensation is profitable and the pain, misery and blood of so many are mere externalities that are not reflected in their balance sheets.
The nations of the world built this house, the United Nations, to forge a different path and we reaffirm today that, despite all its inadequacies, this is a civilizing work that deserves our commitment and sensible alternatives. Those are the foundations that the human family managed to establish after the infamous abyss of two world wars — the tool that was supposed to ward off the risk of our survival in the face of the fire of violence and the disgrace of inequality. Today it appears powerless and incapable of facing the fury of barbarism, paralysed in the face of the evidence that its mission is frustrated with each new report of victims. We need to sow new seeds of hope and change our governance and architecture because after almost eight decades the world, its problems and its physiognomy are no longer recognizable in a mirror that stubbornly insists on the reflection of 1945.
We need to restore confidence in multilateralism and its institutions, in agreement, cooperation and the conviction that despite our rich diversity of colours and geographies, we are brothers and sisters of the same community, on the same planet and with the same destiny. That is what the Pact of the Future (resolution 79/1) calls on us to do — to renew our commitment to overcoming fear and mistrust and restoring the legitimacy of the Organization to which we belong. On that path, in the unavoidable construction of a just, dignified and egalitarian world, Mexico will always be a loyal companion, a committed partner and a fraternal brother.
We must take ownership of today to build tomorrow and, as José Emilio Pacheco wrote about another transformative era, 1968:
“A world is falling apart A world is born The fog surrounds us But the light blazes...
There is no hope There is life And everything is ours.”
In that vein, I also wish to quote Eduardo Galeano, who said,
“What if we start to exercise the never proclaimed right to dream?
What if we rave for a while at the beginning of the millennium, staring beyond the infamy to glimpse another possible world, one where the conjoined twins of justice and freedom, condemned to live apart, will come together again, back to back; one where we will be compatriots and contemporaries of all those who are drawn to beauty and justice, wherever they were born and whenever they lived, with no thought whatsoever for the borders of the map or of time.”
