I bring warm greetings of Yokwe on behalf of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. I congratulate the President of the General Assembly upon his election and look forward to his leadership.
We cannot ignore the fact that our common multilateral progress is failing us in the hour of our greatest need. Perhaps most at risk are human rights, the fundamental freedoms that must be afforded every citizen of this planet. That accountability applies to all without exception or double standard. The Human Rights Council must also work towards a balanced agenda and an inclusive approach to human rights within our diverse global setting. Our own unique legacy and the complex challenges of nuclear testing impacts, climate change and other fundamental challenges inform our perspective that the voices of the most vulnerable must never be drowned out. Those convictions are why the Marshall Islands is a candidate for a seat on the United Nations Human Rights Council for the term 2025-2027, with the endorsement of the Pacific Islands Forum leaders.
For nearly a year, nations around the world have expressed grave concern regarding extreme violence in Gaza and Israel — not just the horrific events that led to that grave conflict, but also the disproportionate and devastating response visited upon an innocent civilian population.
As we look forward to next year’s United Nations Ocean Summit in France, it is vital that the international community take action to protect the health and biodiversity of our oceans. The youngest and future generations of islanders must not be robbed of the benefits we enjoy today. Without sustainable ocean ecosystems, the economy, stability and cultural identity of our region will collapse.
Through regional institutions, our island nations are defining sustainable fisheries and changing the global market. Our distant-fishing partner nations in the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission — many of which are also global super-Powers — need to place long-term sustainability ahead of immediate commercial goals. Illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing is a threat not just to our own economic future, but also to global food security.
The world needs to ensure that the high seas seabed is not stripped of its unique biodiversity before we even document it. Without a clear-eyed scientific understanding of impacts and risks, the world’s oceans are too fragile to turn into a speculative experiment. The Marshall Islands joins the growing chorus applying a precautionary approach towards high-seas mining, at least until there is adequate and meaningful agreement at the International Seabed Authority on binding environmental measures and the mining code.
Sea levels have risen and we are too late to prevent them from eating away at our shores, but we must also be clear that we will not be wiped off the map, nor will we go silently to our watery graves. Sea level rise poses a threat to our long-term ability to remain in our islands and to our fundamental security as a nation and within our ocean-locked Pacific islands region. But for small island developing States (SIDS), our stability and legal identity remain fixed in the future, just as it is now. The Marshall Islands strongly supports the recent Declaration of the Heads of State and Government of the Alliance of Small Island States on Sea-Level Rise and Statehood and we urge other nations to join us in support.
The Marshall Islands welcomes this year’s High-Level Meeting on Sea Level Rise and the ongoing work of the International Law Commission as an opportunity to engage on complex multilateral questions, even where SIDS have already established State practice.
We must do all we can to prevent further melting of the cryosphere. Every nation on Earth has committed, by February next year, to putting forward new nationally determined contributions that set out how they will reduce emissions to keep global temperature rise below 1.5°C. We need Governments to show both ambition and cooperation, as we all agreed to do last year, to triple renewable energy deployment, double energy efficiency and, most importantly, accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels and end the subsidies that support them. Despite that, we have seen some of the planet’s wealthiest countries break their pledges as they double down on fossil fuels. That failure of leadership must stop. There must be no new coal mines, no new gas fields and no new oil wells.
The financial needs for that energy transition, for adapting to climate impacts and for repairing the rising loss and damage are in the trillions of dollars. In Baku later this year, we will decide whether that money is to be made available to developing countries. We must see vastly increase contributions. We must also find money wherever we can. Instead of rewarding some of the richest and most polluting businesses on the planet, we should repurpose those funds to the roll-out of renewables and to directly supporting the poorest and most vulnerable. Right now in the International Maritime Organization, Pacific island negotiators are leading efforts to agree on a universal greenhouse gas levy that gives the right incentive to drive the decarbonization of the shipping industry and raises revenue in the billions, a portion of which should be used to address the climate impacts from shipping pollution and help build resilience in vulnerable countries. I urge every country to join us.
The Marshall Islands emphasizes the importance of the advisory opinion of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on preserving the marine environment from climate-driven pollution. We look forward to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice regarding the climate obligations of States.
The Marshall Islands experienced 67 known atmospheric nuclear tests between 1946 and 1958, resulting in an ongoing legacy of death, illness and contamination. The impacts are handed down generation to generation. Those impacts continue to challenge our human rights. In our culture, our identity is our land. Testing impacts left behind deep scars, with communities remaining in exile from their home islands, billions of dollars in unmet adjudicated claims and a social and environmental burden upon our youngest and future generations. To help ensure that nuclear risk is eliminated, the Marshall Islands is working towards accession to the 1963 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water and the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and its nuclear-free zone.
We did not choose that nuclear fate; it was chosen for us. Trusteeship Council resolutions 1082 (XIV) and 1493 (XVII) were adopted in 1954 and 1956, respectively, despite petitions to the contrary by our Marshallese leaders. Those tests were undertaken by the United States, acting as the United Nations Administering Authority. Those resolutions remain the only instance in which any United Nations organ has ever explicitly authorized the detonation of nuclear weapons. We cannot undo the past, but as a United Nations we owe it to ourselves to make amends through the adoption of a resolution that formally apologizes for the failure to heed the petition of the Marshallese people. By doing so, all of us will begin the process of healing and re-establishing faith and trust in this institution.
Our strong work on human rights and nuclear testing impacts is a fundamental and foundational effort to address transitional human rights, and we call attention to document A/HRC/57/77, containing the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the nuclear legacy in the Marshall Islands and its human rights impacts. In particular, I emphasize my nation’s unequivocal support for the High Commissioner’s important conclusions and recommendations on further action for my own Government, for the United States and for the United Nations.
As a nuclear-affected State, we seek to work with other affected nations and peoples, including in Kiribati, French Polynesia, Australia, Algeria, Kazakhstan, North Korea, the Xinjiang province of mainland China and the United States. All should realize that the responsibility to fully address the harms resulting from the use, detonation or testing of nuclear weapons lies with the Member States that have done so. That is the basis of resolution 78/240, on victim assistance and environmental remediation, and all must know that the scars upon our collective lands and peoples are firm lessons for nuclear weapons elimination.
The Marshall Islands welcomes this year’s adoption of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS as a companion to the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. It is vital that island-driven strategies be better addressed. We are particularly pleased to welcome the strong efforts of the new United Nations Multi-Country Office for the North Pacific in the Federated States of Micronesia and we look forward to the groundbreaking ceremony for the new United Nations complex.
This year’s Triennial Conference of Pacific Women, hosted in the Marshall Islands, demonstrated the region’s continued commitment to advancing gender equality with a focus on the health of women and girls, gender-responsive climate justice and gender-based violence to strengthen and uplift women and girls across the Pacific. It is important in our work going forward that we progress national implementation at scale and build intersections with assistance from the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and the international system, including as a full region and with the United Nations Multi-Country Office for the North Pacific.
We have long understood island-led security in our region, but for many we are only starting to build formal security foundations at a time when full policy strength is needed to turn the Pacific Islands Forum Boe Declaration on Regional Security into action. Recent United Nations action under the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund is a key step up to strengthen treatment of the link between climate and security. We now need to address, with our own direct Pacific voices, geopolitical tension to ensure that our democratic island priorities drive our future, free of external influence and coercion.
Climate impacts pose a grave security challenge alone, but tackling them with core institutions under external stress, coupled with our underlying fragility, risks epic disaster.
Russia’s continued aggression against Ukraine is a threat to basic democratic norms, human rights and international accountability. As island democracies and as vulnerable nations in the shadow of changing geopolitics, the war in Ukraine is of great concern to the Pacific islands, as though Eastern Europe were next door.
The Marshall Islands looks forward to the upcoming high-level visit of the Pacific Islands Forum Troika Plus grouping to New Caledonia. In addition, we support ongoing Forum engagement with Indonesia and West Papua to better understand stakeholders and to ensure human rights.
If we are truly serious that no one is to be left behind, the United Nations should not be blind to Taiwan’s efforts and partnership towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. Only that independent, democratic Government can represent its 23 million people. Resolution 2758 (XXVI) does not mention Taiwan and should not be used as a pretext to exclude Taiwan from participating meaningfully in the United Nations system. That resolution has been misused to threaten cross-strait and regional peace and security. That was never its original intent. It cannot serve as a sound basis to prohibit Taiwanese citizens and journalists from United Nations premises. The Secretariat should maintain neutrality and not be complicit in limiting media freedom.
As key risks deteriorate in and around the world, multilateralism must be strengthened. For small and vulnerable nations, the United Nations, despite all its faults, remains the only institution that offers us a vital platform to voice our concerns, raise issues and, at times, seek shelter from the ravages of conflicts and climate change. The word “multilateralism” can be expressed in the Marshallese proverb “wod in kanol”, meaning the coral where all the fish congregate to seek shelter and feed. Let us all nourish and maintain it for ourselves and future generations. The United Nations is that very coral — wod in kanol. Let us leave no country behind.
