Those familiar with the Macedonian case know about the Scyllas and Charybdis’ that my homeland, a small Balkan State, has endured and continues to endure. Although indirectly, as one of the six constituent republics of the former Yugoslavia, Macedonia participated in the creation of the United Nations, yet upon our admission in 1993 we faced a great injustice — namely, the country was admitted under the temporary reference of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, along with the additional condition “to negotiate until a final solution to the name issue is found”. The Prespa Agreement was signed and ratified in 2018, a process that was followed by an unsuccessful referendum and constitutional changes, following which the Republic of Macedonia legally and formally became the Republic of North Macedonia.
As a professor of constitutional law and a former member of the Venice Commission, I know that what is legal is not always what is just and legitimate, because in the case of my country the decision was not enacted in accordance with international and national law, in particular the right to self-determination of every nation, guaranteed by the Charter of the United Nations, and the 1974 Constitution of federal Yugoslavia was set aside.
The line that divides the legal from the just is sometimes merely a crack, but at other times it is a deep gap and even an abyss. That gap, that abyss, most often and most severely affects the small nations and States, which are the first victims of the clash between force and justice, which can be an insurmountable obstacle to realizing the right to progress. The new name is indeed a formal, legal reality and my country, as a responsible State Member of the United Nations and NATO, is meeting its international obligations. Still, the membership of the European Union (EU) for which we went through all of that not only did not materialize, but Macedonian citizens are now facing a new, repeated final condition for another constitutional amendment — this time not for membership but for the start of a second round of negotiations.
For us, membership of the EU, after 20 years of negotiations and 16 positive European Commission reports, resembles Mr. Godot, because we have been waiting for him since 2005, encouraged by international representatives with the refrain “just this one condition more, just this one concession more, just this one constitutional amendment more”. Thus, we have become a sui generis State, with 36 constitutional amendments in 30 years, anchored in the geopolitical region called the Western Balkans.
As a peace-loving country committed to good-neighbourliness and regional cooperation, we expect understanding and cooperation with our neighbours, without the threat of a veto. Where there is a veto, there is often no justice. The veto has turned into an instrument for the bilateralization of European integration, or rather its stagnation. In conditions of conflict on European soil, the stagnation of European integration not only demotivates Macedonian citizens and slows reforms, but also destabilizes the region of South-East Europe, leaving room for the infiltration of malignant imperial and great Power influences. Enlargement must be tied to the meritocratic Copenhagen criteria and freed from the veto linked to the attempt to revise history and disrespect national and cultural identity. From our European and strategic partners, we expect understanding and the fair unblocking of the process of negotiations for membership of the European Union, the rejection of double standards and respect for our own principles and values embedded in fundamental constitutional documents.
Without us, European reunification is like an unfinished symphony. The European Union is not only a political system but also a political philosophy in which the largest number of Macedonian and Balkan political actors and citizens believe. Integration is a powerful motivator and key force for democratic development. The full integration of the Balkans into the EU will put an end to the endless redrawing of borders and so-called balkanization as a phenomenon. However, the Balkan States must of course behave in compliance with European standards by connecting and cooperating at the regional level. The experience is valuable and the help of the countries of the region that have already joined the EU, as well as those that are on the European path, is highly appreciated. We must learn to support each other, as we have done with the coronavirus disease pandemic, floods and fires, instead of blocking each other on the European journey. Homo Balkanicus can be homo Europicus whenever we want.
The line that divides the legal from the just is intertwined not only in the case of Macedonian, but also in almost all issues that are on the United Nations agenda, including those covered by the topic of this year’s general debate, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. We are faced with big questions.
Let me start with the most important one — peace. Is a just peace possible when we are faced with more and more wars and flagrant violations of the Charter of the United Nations? Is a just peace possible with the deepening militarization of politics and the new arms race?
Is human dignity possible in an environment of double standards where human lives are not valued equally and where the sufferings of innocent victims in conflicts are not treated equally?
How can we achieve fair and just development when we are plunged into the race for profit at the expense of nations and the planet and when global public goods are sacrificed, marginalized, stuck at the periphery and forsaken in national and corporate policies and actions?
How can we achieve social justice in conditions of growing economic, educational, gender and digital disparity among States and within the States themselves, with fewer and fewer winners and more and more losers in the context of globalization and digitalization, the former sinking into decadence and the latter into pauperization?
How will we ensure generational justice if we pursue the irresponsible and uncontrolled exploitation of limited resources? How will we create a safe and sustainable future for our descendants if we continue to engage in ecocidal production practices and consumer habits that leave a world choked with air pollution, poisoned with pesticides and littered with plastic? With the alarming level of greenhouse gas emissions, which are rapidly leading to climate change with catastrophic consequences, can we even talk about responsibility, or should we start thinking about survival or our ability to live?
The main problem is that all those injustices are systemic, which means that while they are not legal, they are tacitly tolerated. What is legal, unfortunately, is not always what is just and moral, if I may say so once again. Why is that so? In the most famous dialogue about power and justice, Thucydides recalls that,
“justice is a word that has value in disputes only when both sides are of equal strength; in other cases, the strong do what they can and the weak suffer they must”.
But the United Nations exists to ennoble the cruel Thucydean world by securing legal equality among nations, taming the power of the great and protecting the small nations. That legal equality is a prerequisite for achieving the highest goals of the United Nations: peace and security, human rights and sustainable development. The United Nations exists to bridge or at least narrow the gap between the legal and the just. We are facing a big challenge. How can the legal become just, or how can the just become legal? And how can the legal and the just be implemented?
There are no simple, inexpensive or painless solutions to that dual challenge. Here in the General Assembly Hall, world leaders have for years shared their expectations of and disappointments with the United Nations, which not infrequently oscillate between the two extremes of utopian optimism, on the one hand, and nihilistic pessimism, on the other. Still, reality is complex and contains both successes and failures.
The United Nations has prevented another world war, but it has failed to prevent and preclude regional conflicts, including the war in Ukraine and the bloodshed in the Middle East, the scenes from which resemble Picasso’s Guernica. The world Organization has lifted millions of people out of poverty, but it still fails to eradicate hunger. With the right to self-determination, it accelerated the process of decolonization but failed to bridge the gap between the rich North and the poor South. The United Nations is the main driver for resolving global security, migration, health, environmental, energy and climate crises, but hardly any of them are fully and justly resolved. The resolutions of the General Assembly reflect the will of the majority of nations but are not always consistently respected. The International Court of Justice is the ultimate instance of justice among States, yet its judgments are not always implemented or even treated as advice.
The world is going through a turbulent geopolitical, economic, scientific, technological and industrial transformation in which the human species has a huge impact on the planet. I fear that humankind is destroying the Garden of Eden and will be kicked out of it again unless the United Nations supports it. But the competences, structures and procedures of the United Nations seem to have been frozen at the time of its founding in 1945. Instead of increased cooperation and action on pressing issues, geopolitical rivalries and a new arms race are intensifying and rapidly pushing us towards a state resembling a new, second Cold War and Orwell’s world, too. We have rarely needed the United Nations as we do today, and yet the United Nations has rarely been as politically marginalized as it is today.
To overcome that political marginalization, a new spirit of multilateralism is needed that will alleviate geopolitical rivalries and increase trust and cooperation among States around shared challenges. That multilateralism rests on three pillars.
The first pillar is consistent compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law, which exists to protect the weaker from the predatory instincts of the stronger. In that context, the Macedonian State firmly maintains its insistence that territorial claims and attempts to acquire territory by force are flagrant violations of the Charter of the United Nations. When dangerous precedents go unchallenged, they become tolerated practices that threaten world peace and security. Therefore, we support efforts for a sustainable, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, based on international law, including the United Nations Charter.
In that regard, we fully comply with the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union. That is important for us, since wars and conflicts also affect peace and stability in South-East Europe and the Western Balkans. Multilateralism also depends on respect for international treaties. As a country committed to good-neighbourliness and regional cooperation, we respect bilateral agreements with our neighbours and expect our neighbours to respect those agreements without abusing the right of the veto.
The second pillar of multilateralism is the consistent implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and the related Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. At the national level, with the support of the United Nations and its agencies, we are incorporating the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development into our long-term development strategies, policies and laws. High on our agenda are climate action, a green and just transition, gender equality and the fight against discrimination against women and girls, as well as the inclusion of young people in decision-making processes. Two-thirds of the Sustainable Development Goals are directly related to European legislation, so the United Nations helps us implement European reforms as well. We are indeed grateful for that.
I see the third pillar of the new multilateralism in a greater commitment to the reform of the United Nations, which must be substantive, not cosmetic and corrective, unlock the potential of the United Nations and enable the voice of every State, large or small, to be equally heard and valued.
The first set of reforms should help align the United Nations with new challenges and new development priorities. The more frequent extreme weather phenomena caused by climate change are just a prelude of the kind of future that awaits us and our descendants if humankind’s attitude towards nature and the planet does not fundamentally change. We need not only a new social contract, as per Rousseau, but also a natural contract, as per Michel Serres, on the basis of which we will treat nature as a partner.
The second set of reforms would cover the structures and procedures of the United Nations, starting with the voting rules and extending to financing and the autonomy of the Secretary-General. As I said, where there is a veto there is often no justice. It is an indisputable fact that the right of the veto is legal, but the question is: How just can it be when it is used to paralyse processes on which the attainment of the goals of the Charter and the expectations of the peoples of the world depend? The General Assembly just be given a greater role in decision-making as a representative body of the nations, in the spirit of we the peoples and we the nations. The legitimacy of the Security Council derives from the General Assembly, so it should function as a kind of coalition Government of nations.
The third set of reforms would strengthen the United Nations mechanism to protect vulnerable populations and groups, which is especially important today, when the number of victims and refugees is at its highest level since the Second World War.
Next year, we will celebrate the eightieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. This year is the last call. The United Nations will either become an engine that moves the world towards a more humane, more just and sustainable order, based on inclusive and accountable governance, or be reduced to a passive, bureaucratized structure completely dependent on the main actors in geopolitical processes and relations. Only a fundamentally reformed United Nations can bridge the gap between the legal and the just and contribute to a truly transformed world in which no one is left behind and forgotten.
