At the outset, I would like to extend the warm greetings of Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali, and of the Government and the people of Mali.
I would also like to extend to Mr. Philemon Yang the warm congratulations of the Malian delegation on his outstanding election to the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. His beautiful country, Cameroon, a brotherly and friendly African country, maintains excellent relations with my country. He can count on Mali’s full support in the successful accomplishment of his mandate.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate his predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, for the remarkable manner in which he conducted the work of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
Finally, allow me to reiterate to Secretary-General António Guterres our encouragement to pursue his efforts to achieve the noble objectives of our common Organization.
On 26 June 1945, by signing the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco, peoples resolutely committed themselves “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind”. Today we have the opportunity to express our views on the theme “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. Was the choice of that theme, which comes 79 years after the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, pure chance or the result of a mental construct? We do not know, but it must be noted, unfortunately, that the problem of saving generations — not only those of the future, but also our own — still arises with great acuity. Is that a failure of the United Nations? Undoubtedly, an objective assessment, with realistic recommendations for our collective system, would be beneficial for our future.
Mali welcomes the relevance of the theme, which is of burning topicality in the light of the ongoing tensions and wars that continue, unfortunately, to threaten international peace and security, development and the fundamental rights of populations. I say that as the representative of a country that, since 2012, has endured a complex multidimensional crisis, resulting in the loss of more than half of its territory and many innocent victims, following an incestuous and opportunistic partnership between terrorist groups and armed groups.
The tragedy in Mali dates back to the allegiance pledged to Al-Qaeda by the Algerian Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat on 11 September 2006, and was exacerbated by NATO’s risky military intervention in Libya in 2011. The destabilization of that brotherly country has aggravated the factors of insecurity in our countries, namely, terrorism, trafficking of all kinds, money-laundering, community conflicts manipulated by terrorists and their foreign State sponsors, and the violent actions of isolated individuals.
For their part, the Malian authorities, after noting the failure of the international forces deployed on their national territory since 2013, decided to take their destiny into their own hands. Thus, since 7 June 2021, following the swearing-in of Colonel Assimi Goïta as President of the Transition and Head of State, a vast project was launched to equip and reorganize the Defence and Security Forces, associated with a project to refound Mali. The National Refoundation Conference, launched in December 2021, allowed Malians to carry out an exhaustive diagnosis of the causes of the crisis and then to adopt 517 relevant recommendations. In that regard, and after having experienced insecurity imposed by the state of nature, the inventory of Mali’s afflictions is appalling. Violated, humiliated, plundered and torpedoed, abandoned in mid-flight, stabbed in the back — there is no end of horrors to describe the suffering endured by the Malian people and the Defence and Security Forces.
With that experience and understanding that the Malian peril was only the result of the state of nature, Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali, was forced to develop a realistic vision of geopolitics, drawing on a popular proverb in Bambara, here freely translated and contextualized: “The succulence of the sauce of some depends on the plundering of the cattle of others”. Thomas Hobbes, describing the state of nature in an identical manner, stated that “man is a wolf to man”. Through that proverb, which refers to gastronomy and hunting, the Head of State describes the harsh and merciless reality of international relations, especially in Africa, the plundering of whose raw materials has served the development of others and not that of the vast majority of Africans.
Added to that vision is the guidance offered by the Head of State, calling on Malians, within the framework of the refoundation, to “become themselves again”. Indeed, on 23 April, the Head of State launched the National Programme of Education in Values, which is aimed at “a return to the source, without which it would be difficult to envisage a bright future for our country in its legitimate quest for sovereignty”. The invitation to become ourselves again cannot ignore the question of who we are. The immediate answer to that question is provided by Mali’s motto: “One people” — a large, cosmopolitan nation family; “One goal” — to magnify diversity in unity, united to build the common good; “One faith” — faith in what God has given us as a resource for the achievement of prosperity.
In order to give greater dimension to the definition of what constitutes the Malian citizen, Professor Ibrahim Ndiaye, an expert within the committee responsible for the implementation of the National Programme of Education in Values, indicates that Malian can be characterized, on the one hand, by five cardinal values: humanity, empathy, the obligation to transmit human values to future generations, a sense of honour, and acceptance of difference and otherness at the societal, human and cultural level; and, on the other hand, by five inviolable principles linked to the country itself: a Mali that is indivisible, inalienable, not mortgageable and imperishable and that cannot be disposed of as private property,.
By focusing on being themselves, Malians are creating a third way by not acting predators or lawless barbarians, not coveting other people’s cattle, and not becoming eternal victims helpless in the face of predation. The middle way promoted by Mali consists of achieving our development by taking the more virtuous path of ensuring respect for our sovereignty while respecting that of others; rejecting heteronomy while refusing to interfere in the internal affairs of others; and being open to all partnerships on a win-win basis. It is also important to note that those principles and values characterize, mutatis mutandis, the brotherly peoples of Burkina Faso and the Republic of the Niger.
Regarding the political transition process in Mali, it should be recalled that, following the National Refoundation Conference, the Malian people chose to carry out political reforms before organizing elections, with a view to deeply anchoring virtuous governance. The implementation of the recommendations of the Conference has made it possible to achieve tangible results, in particular the establishment of the Independent Election Management Authority; the adoption of the new Constitution on 22 July 2023, following a well-organized referendum; the completion of the territorial and administrative reorganization; the strengthening of the fight against corruption and the transparency of public action; and the review of the mining code to make it fairer and favourable to local content.
Concerned about perpetuating national unity, the basis of all development, the Head of State announced on 31 December 2023 the holding of the Inter-Malian Dialogue for Peace and Reconciliation, in order, he said, “to eliminate the root causes of community and inter-community conflicts with the ultimate goal of reconciling communities”. Adhering to a participatory and inclusive approach, the Inter-Malian Dialogue, which took place in three phases — municipal, regional and national — allowed Malians from the interior and the diaspora to debate in complete transparency with a view to finding endogenous solutions for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts. Unlike the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali arising from the Algiers process — some of whose signatory groups openly turned to terrorism and which had become a pretext for certain States to interfere in Mali’s internal affairs — the Inter-Malian Dialogue allowed Malians to wash their dirty linen in private without any external interference. After the Algiers Agreement expired on 25 January, the Inter-Malian Dialogue and its recommendations, officially submitted to the Head of State on 13 May, remain the only framework for resolving internal conflicts. We reiterate our appeal to all Malians to join the dynamic of reconciliation, an essential step towards a return to peaceful and secure constitutional order, thanks to the organization of presidential elections.
In terms of the fight against insecurity, many successes have been achieved in the fight against terrorism since the Malian Defence and Security Forces launched autonomous offensive actions. All regions have been retaken from the hands of terrorist groups, including the Kidal region on 14 November 2023, following a memorable military operation. Today the terrorist groups are seriously weakened and the Defence and Security Forces are deployed throughout the national territory. Furthermore, the offensive actions of our forces continue to dismantle the residual terrorist networks.
The Government of Mali remains aware that a purely security response has its limits. That is why, in support of military action, the Government of Mali has adopted a comprehensive and integrated strategy aimed at restoring the authority of the State throughout the national territory. It includes political, administrative, economic and social development measures, including dialogue with armed groups and the provision of basic social services to our populations. Despite those very appreciable results, the criminal groups retain a certain capacity for harm in their desperate attempts to undermine our territorial integrity and terrorize our populations, with — and I must deplore this from this rostrum — the support of foreign State sponsors.
Speaking of foreign State sponsors, after years of denouncing State actors that support international terrorism, the Ukrainian authorities openly and unprecedentedly violated the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the relevant United Nations conventions and resolutions relating to the prevention and fight against terrorism, when officials of that country, having misconstrued the international scene as a theatre of war, admitted that their country had actively participated in the cowardly terrorist attack targeting a patrol of the Defence and Security Forces, from 24 to 26 July, in Tinzawatene, in the Kidal region.
In view of the complexity of the situation in the Sahel, and motivated by their sole desire to take the destiny of their countries in hand, Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso and Head of State of Burkina; Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali; and Brigadier General Abdourahamane Tiani, President of the National Council for the Safeguarding of the Homeland and Head of State of the Niger, initially established the Alliance of Sahel States (AES), an architecture of collective defence and mutual assistance in the fight against terrorism, by signing the Liptako-Gourma Charter on 16 September 2023. Ten months later — precisely, on 6 July 2024 — the founding fathers of the AES made the sovereign decision to transform that mechanism into a confederation centred on three axes — diplomacy, defence and development — before ultimately establishing a federation. In a short time, edifying results have been achieved in the fight against terrorism thanks to the pooling of defence resources, jointly conducted military operations and an unwavering commitment to eradicating terrorism.
That is why the States members of the Confederation of Sahel States sent a joint letter to the Security Council (S/2024/62, annex) on 19 August to denounce the Ukrainian authorities’ support for international terrorism, condemn the aggression against Mali and ask the Security Council to take appropriate measures against the Ukrainian authorities. Incidentally, allow me to point out that this letter was sent while Mali was still waiting for the follow-up to a previous letter of referral to the Security Council, dated 15 August 2022 (S/2022/622), in order to expose France’s acts of aggression against us and its involvement in the promotion of three forms of terrorism in the Sahel: armed terrorism, economic terrorism and media terrorism.
Covering an area of 2,758,000 square kilometres, with 71 million inhabitants, mostly young, an exceptional economic potential and a subsoil rich in almost all the elements on the Mendeleev table, the particularity of the Confederation of Sahel States lies in the state of mind of the Heads of State, the peoples and the defence and security forces of the Confederation, firm in their dignity and honour; motivated more than ever by the blood shed by their own; determined to fight terrorism in all its forms and to honour the memory of the victims of barbarism, civilians and soldiers, Sahelians and foreigners; and determined to defend the integrity of their land and to ensure their prosperity in a peaceful manner, as stipulated in the preamble to the Liptako-Gourma Charter, which refers to several international organizations, including the Economic Community of West African State (ECOWAS) and to universal values. We tell the bloodletters of war and the sowers of chaos that, with the help of God, we will triumph again and again over their disastrous and diabolical works.
Curiously, since the creation of the AES, we have been surprised by the fierce hostility with which it has been received, in particular by certain ECOWAS officials, at the behest of imperialist and neocolonial entities. The rest of the story is well known. As Amadou Hampâté Ba has said, “When you try to get rid a frog that disgusts you, you end up throwing it into a good pond”. The Confederation of Sahel States is open to all investors, provided that the partnership benefits the Sahelian populations and on condition that the sovereignty of the States is respected.
I take this opportunity to commend the exemplary and fruitful cooperative relations between Mali and Russia, China, Türkiye, Iran and many other sincere allies. Mali remains open to all partners who wish to help it meet its multiple challenges. In that regard, I reaffirm that the Government of Mali remains willing to maintain and strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations, particularly through the agencies , funds and programmes with which we maintain excellent cooperative relations.
We also take this opportunity to salute and recognize the wisdom of President Abdelmadjid Tebboune, President of the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria. On 29 August, during a tour of southern Algeria, he declared that Libya, the Niger and Mali were fraternal nations that he would support and never let down. The Malian people were not surprised by those remarks, which eloquently highlighted the Pan-Africanism he shares with his famous predecessors, including the late President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, affectionately nicknamed “Abdelkader Mali” following his establishment in Gao and the commitments made by the Malian authorities through the following actions: offering Malian territory as a rear base for the Mujahideen, thereby opening a southern front; participating in armed clashes against the French colonizer by deploying Malian fighters alongside the Mujahideen on Algerian territory to defend the freedom and dignity of Algerians; and defending the Algerian cause in all diplomatic instances until independence was won.
However, it is our duty to draw President Tebboune’s attention to incongruous remarks made by two of his colleagues, counter to his desire to promote harmonious relations with his neighbours, including Mali. On 31 July, the Algerian Minister for Foreign Affairs declared that the Malian crisis did not require a military solution and that “it is a conflict between brothers. The solution can only be political”. Regarding the Algiers Agreement, he stated that it had been beneficial for Mali and had preserved Mali’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and that departing from it would therefore have a negative impact on all its achievements.
Furthermore, on 26 August, the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations stated that,
“this morning I learned from the media that a drone carried out a strike in northern Mali, killing some 20 civilians. Those who guide such drones are accountable to no one for these strikes”.
Based on an analysis of the former’s remarks, we deem it to be an instance of serious interference in Mali’s internal affairs. Indeed, the nature of the solution deployed by the Malian authorities concerns Malians alone. Since the Algiers Agreement expired on 25 January, Malians have expressed only one wish in its regard — that its soul may rest in peace. I inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs that the Agreement is well and truly dead and that his incantations will not serve to resuscitate it. He affords me the opportunity, on the one hand, to reiterate that no one can love Mali more than the Malians themselves and, on the other, to remind him that Mali and its people will not be bystanders in the face of assaults and adversity. For every word uttered incorrectly, we will react in reciprocity; for every bullet fired against us, we will react in reciprocity. To those who have ears to hear, too bad!
As for the Algerian Permanent Representative, in addition to offering room and board — no doubt with succulent helpings of chakchouka and chorba — to terrorists and renegades in disarray, his role as a disoriented courier hardly contributes to the promotion of good-neighbourly relations. Serious and unfounded accusations can be inferred from his remarks. On the one hand, his characterization of the civilian status of the victims, based on media reports, is adventurous and defamatory; on the other, by affirming that drone operators are not accountable to anyone he fuels a disinformation campaign against Mali, while supporting the idea that the valiant Malian Defence and Security Forces would be incapable of piloting drones. I am pleased to recall here that the strengthening of the Malian Armed Forces is not a figment of the imagination, but a tangible reality that has made it possible to regain control of the entire national territory.
Concerning the use of drones, the operators are indeed Malians who act professionally, like the rest of the Malian Defence and Security Forces, and deal with terrorist targets following procedures that comply with international standards. As a reminder, a few years ago the weaponizers of human rights, determined to tarnish the anti-terrorist performance of the Algerian National Army, highlighted the subversive question of “who kills whom?”. Today we are troubled that the Algerian Permanent Representative has joined the bandwagon of those who manipulate human rights to attack the Malian army.
Mali demands that those two diplomatic firebrands stop addressing history backwards. Obviously, they are ignorant of everything concerning both the history between the brother peoples of Mali and Algeria and of Mali’s exceptional contribution to the Algerian war of liberation, and certainly of geography, because they wrongly consider Mali to be a wilaya, that is, an Algerian province. I repeat that Mali demands that those two diplomatic firebrands stop addressing history backwards. Obviously, they are ignorant of everything concerning both the history between the brother peoples of Mali and Algeria and of Mali’s exceptional contribution to the Algerian war of liberation, and certainly of geography, because they wrongly consider Mali to be a wilaya, that is, an Algerian province. I repeat one last time that Mali demands that those two diplomatic firebrands stop addressing history backwards. Obviously, they are ignorant of everything concerning both the history between the brother peoples of Mali and Algeria and of Mali’s exceptional contribution to the Algerian war of liberation, and certainly of geography, because they wrongly consider Mali to be a wilaya, that is, an Algerian province.
With respect to the regional and international situation, Mali remains very attentive to current developments in Africa and the rest of the world. We are therefore concerned about the level of violence in the Middle East, particularly in the occupied Palestinian territories. The Malian people reaffirm their support for the brotherly Palestinian people in their legitimate struggle for self-determination. The Government of Mali reiterates its support for the solution of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side-by-side in peace and security within secure and internationally recognized borders. We condemn without reservation the indiscriminate use of force by the Israeli army against the Palestinians.
On the humanitarian level, Mali is concerned about the precarious situation of millions of refugees and internally displaced persons throughout the world due to armed conflicts, natural disasters and climate change. At this time, I offer a special thought for my compatriots who have taken refuge in neighbouring countries, which I thank for their hospitality and generosity. I assure them that the Malian Government will spare no effort in continuing to assist them and in creating conditions that will allow them to return with dignity and in complete safety to their places of origin.
The multiple challenges to international peace and security call for the reform of the dedicated architecture of the United Nations. In the same vein, Mali continues to advocate for the reform of global political, economic and financial governance in order to create optimal and fair conditions for the development of our countries. In that dynamic, Mali continues to advocate for the reform of international financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Similarly, we welcome alternative and credible models, such as the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa group.
Climate change also poses a real threat to present and future generations. We must have the courage to break away from the prevailing dogmatism and narrow interest games regarding that issue. In that regard, the time has come to effectively implement the decisions of our summits and the Conferences of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The countries responsible for global warming must assume their full responsibilities, including that of supporting the efforts of countries of the South for environmentally friendly development.
In conclusion, I note that the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly is being held in a context of immense challenges for our States and our multilateral institutions. International peace and security have never been so threatened since the two great wars, including by international terrorism and violent extremism. In that context, it will be difficult to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 in terms of education, health, access to drinking water, energy and justice.
However, despite those twists and turns, Mali remains willing to play its part in implementing its national and international commitments, while maintaining a certain hope for the future. May God bless Mali and protect Malians from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world. May God bless the Confederation of Sahel States and protect the Sahelian populations from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world. May God bless Africa and protect Africans from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world. May God bless the world and protect all humankind from the obscurantist and destructive forces of the world.
