It is my pleasure to address the General Assembly today on behalf of Montenegro and to reiterate our unequivocal support for and commitment to the goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the overall mission of the world Organization, as we are confronted with unprecedented challenges across the globe, not only in terms of international peace and security but in other domains as well.
Allow me to extend due acknowledgement and gratitude to the President of the General Assembly at its previous session, Mr. Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, for his achievements and guidance through these unsettling circumstances.
Furthermore, I would like to express our best wishes to his successor, Mr. Philemon Yang of Cameroon. We wish him a successful tenure and we welcome his choice of this year’s debate theme, as it faithfully portrays the very mission of the United Nations. He can count on the full support of the Montenegrin delegation.
Leaving no one behind while acting together for peace and security, sustainable development and human dignity is the key challenge before the United Nations, to which, unfortunately, as a community, we have still failed to provide an effective and a comprehensive response. The achievement of a peaceful and sustainable future, against the backdrop of the one-sided, arbitrary and authoritative actions of a handful of international actors whose actions are jeopardizing the peace and welfare of the majority, will require our full-scale vigilance and awareness and put our words and our rhetoric to a practical test.
Even though ongoing geopolitical developments have clearly demonstrated that our efforts have fallen short and that we must do much more — and not just more, but much better — there is a solution and an alternative. It is multilateralism at its best and strongest, led by a more powerful United Nations at the helm of international cooperation and global response, if we are to have a peaceful and prosperous global society.
Nation-based, narrow approaches, as opposed to global solutions, still dominate the international environment and, rather than uniting in joint endeavours with positive global implications, we are losing ground to authoritarianism and unilateral behaviour. In addition to the crisis in the Middle East, Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, civil war in the Sudan and instability in the Horn of Africa, Yemen, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar and Haiti, we are facing a number of other issues, including the climate emergency, growing food insecurity, the erosion of democracy and human rights, growing terrorism and violent extremism, cyberthreats and backsliding on the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which only contribute to an already alarming global situation.
We commend and support the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace, which offers and, indeed, identifies the needed tools and measures for generating a quality response to ongoing challenges, especially through disarmament, greater investment in diplomacy and mediation, the mitigation of geopolitical influence on populations, the prevention of further fragmentation of global trade rules, the effective tackling of climate change issues and the prevention of violence and human rights violations.
As we are all very much aware, the pace of SDG implementation is not at the percentage we hoped for. Member States need to commit to the realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as the best possible way to build long-standing peace and prosperity. However, we need to take into consideration that developing economies are not able to sufficiently finance policies to implement the SDGs, especially in the light of the negative impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
We are committed to the promotion of good governance and strong institutions at all levels as key enablers of sustainable development, peace and security, and we strongly advocate reforms towards a more inclusive and representative international financial architecture. Therefore, we support the Secretary-General’s appeal for a wholesale reform of the financial architecture, which, at the moment, does not offer developing countries the affordable financing needed to achieve the SDGs, and we join the United Nations in calling upon the international financial structure to finance those countries in the form of eligible credit arrangements.
Within its capabilities, Montenegro will continue to fully support transformation based on accelerating the implementation of the goals and objectives of sustainable development, with the aim of achieving continuous, inclusive and sustainable economic growth while protecting natural resources, improving the state of human resources and strengthening social inclusion.
In view of the volatile situation in the Middle East, I would like to express Montenegro’s deep concern over the escalating violence and the humanitarian situation in Gaza, with the destruction of infrastructure and the lack of water, food and health care. We call upon all the parties to de-escalate and engage in meaningful dialogue. Our position is clear — we have condemned the indiscriminate terrorist attacks by Hamas on Israel from 7 October 2023. At the same time, however, we also condemn every act of violence against the civilian population, as well as the interruption of water, food and energy supplies in the Gaza Strip. It is of absolute importance that the humanitarian corridors be opened and humanitarian aid provided to civilians. Any response to a terrorist attack must be undertaken in accordance with international humanitarian law.
We call for a humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza, during which negotiations would be conducted towards reaching a two-State solution, as only a two-State model guarantees lasting and sustainable peace in the region. Again, regardless of the outcome of the negotiations, international law must be upheld by all the parties to the conflict and all hostages still in captivity released immediately and unconditionally.
Montenegro also reiterates its strong condemnation of the destruction that the Russian aggression has caused in Ukraine, including the killing of civilians, as well as unlawful attacks on civilian infrastructure, sexual and gender-based violence and reports of child abductions. We emphasize yet again that there can be no impunity for war and other heinous crimes and that we must ensure responsibility, as a precondition for ensuring a durable peace. In that regard, we support all accountability initiatives to fight impunity and ensure justice.
As the aggression has been particularly devastating for children, we call on the Russian Federation to fully respect international humanitarian law and to immediately implement measures to protect children. In addition, we call on the Russian Federation to cease its attacks on civilian infrastructure and to allow aid to the affected civilian population, including areas under temporary Russian military control.
I would like to reconfirm our support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. Montenegro will continue to support Ukraine and to provide financial, humanitarian, military and diplomatic aid. Like the entire international community, we want to see a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.
I believe that we can all agree that the ongoing global crises represent one of the gravest challenges to international peace and security since the creation of the world Organization. The world ought to be united as ever before in defending democracy, human rights, freedom of choice and the rule of law, ensuring peace and prosperity and, above all, preserving human lives.
The international community must also do significantly more in the fight against climate change through much-needed decisive actions, such as the full implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The recognition of the interconnections between the threefold planetary crises of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution is needed as we strengthen climate action. The Sustainable Development Goals and the fight against climate change are fundamentally linked to peace and security and human rights. Without peace, no other goals — from human rights and gender equality to addressing climate change and water, energy and food security — will be achieved.
The increasing number of conflicts, as well as ever-growing threats to international peace and security, require a change in current global practices and the application of a holistic and coordinated approach within the United Nations system, based on prevention. It is in that context that we must take better advantage of the preventive capacity of the Human Rights Council (HRC). As a member of the Council for the term 2022-2024, we fully recognize its contribution to the early warning system when it comes to the prevention of violence and mass violations of human rights. Unfortunately, as is the case with other forums, I am afraid that we do not use them properly or to the fullest scope of their potential.
Nevertheless, Montenegro remains a dedicated defender and promoter of human rights and freedoms and their universality and indivisibility, which we must not take for granted. Advancing and supporting the integration of human rights and the gender perspective into all aspects of the work of the United Nations and preserving the universality and independence of the human rights system, remains our absolute priority. In that light we must further strengthen the HRC role in responding to situations of serious human rights violations globally.
There are still far too many places in the world where peace, stability, human rights and even basic necessities are a luxury. That is something that we cannot be proud of — on the contrary. We place emphasis more often on reactionary humanitarian response rather than on a preventive one. Nevertheless, although of vital importance for the affected population, humanitarian aid needs to be followed by an adequate political solution, representing the best way to sustainably end violence and establish long-term peace.
Montenegro is firmly committed and determined to actively and constructively contribute and support collective efforts to preserve world peace and security, and in that regard supports the New Agenda for Peace as an opportunity to shape new responses to old and emerging threats, including by strengthening prevention, adapting United Nations peacekeeping forces to the new environment and strengthening the peacebuilding architecture, including by ensuring adequate, predictable and sustainable financing for peacebuilding and the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in all its dimensions, as well as the youth, peace and security agenda. At the same time, Montenegro continues to actively participate in peacekeeping missions, aware that only a safe neighbourhood can provide a guarantee of our own security and prosperity.
Furthermore, we hope that the New Agenda for Peace will contribute to the preservation, implementation and further strengthening of the global architecture for arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation, as well as the multilateral export control regimes, while at the same strengthening multilateral capacities to address the challenges of terrorism and violent extremism, hybrid threats and cyberrisks.
The solution to all of those challenges must go hand-in-hand with the reform of the United Nations system, in line with the reform agenda of the Security Council. In particular, as a small country, we are interested in strengthening the authority and role of the General Assembly, as well as its efficiency, and of other main United Nations bodies. The reform of the United Nations system presupposes a flexible attitude on the part of all participants in the negotiating process, especially in the process of reforming the Security Council. We believe that the reform of the Security Council as the guardian of international peace and security is necessary through the expansion of its membership to achieve a more equal representation of regional groups, which would enable the more effective maintenance of international peace and security. In order for the United Nations to maintain and strengthen its central position in the global governance system, it is vital that the Organization be reformed and adapted to the geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century and modern democratic values.
In the conditions of increasingly sharp international polarization, fragmentation and instability and od economic and geopolitical uncertainty, it is our common responsibility to show the true value of the United Nations and effective multilateralism as a global solution to global challenges. Either we can choose further isolationism, the erosion of trust, growing xenophobia, nationalism and extremist ideas, or we can make a breakthrough by choosing a future based on the highest civilizational values of equality, justice, responsibility and solidarity, and not on retrograde ideologies, selfishness and unscrupulous populism.
As John Adams once said, “Every problem is an opportunity in disguise”. That is precisely what we have in our hands — a unique opportunity to use the current deteriorating international environment to create momentum for building a more equal, just and sustainable world, with a revitalized multilateralism based on fair and humane globalization and respect for the human rights and dignity of all. We must act for peace and progress now while we still have the chance, built on achieving a just and quality of life for all.
Montenegro, proud of its centuries-old multiethnic and multiconfessional tradition, remains steadfast on the course of a Euro-Atlantic future, good-neighbourly relations and multilateralism. Being a geographical part of Europe, as well as in our values and principles, we are convinced that only the acceleration of integration processes and the stronger incentive of our European Union partners can bring about the stability and prosperity of the region, which is undoubtedly an important asset and contribution to the overall security and stability of Europe. Montenegro will continue to tirelessly pursue and promote those policies, with undiminished commitment to the values of multilateralism and open and friendly cooperation.
The very core principles of the United Nations Charter are not just being compromised, but essentially nullified. We cannot act as innocent bystanders, because we are not. We must rise to the challenge, raise our voice and stand up for those in need, and demonstrate that our common values are not subject to interpretation, but that those who violate those principles have to be held accountable.
Too many people have already lost their lives in recent conflicts across the globe. They have lost their loved ones and their homes, and in most cases are forced to flee their countries. That must not happen in the twenty-first century. It is not what our predecessors fought for. We are better than that, but we must show it. This cannot be the heritage we wish to leave to our children. We must do better, for the sake of the generations to come.
