At the outset, I would like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, and to wish him every success in his important work during this session.
Every time I participate in the General Assembly, I find great pleasure in observing the sculpture entitled Consciousness, created by a renowned Mongolian artist and located in the gardens at United Nations Headquarters. It inspires deep contemplation, reminding us of our responsibilities, awareness and dignity in the context of humankind’s history and our obligations to future generations. That profoundly meaningful work is a symbol of the historic moment when countries around the world embraced the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. When I visited it this year the monument stood solemnly, as though urging us to reflect on the goals and commitments we have made for future generations.
Unfortunately, as we approach the moment when we must assess the implementation of those documents, we can see that our efforts and the progress that we have made are insufficient. For instance, although we are halfway through the timeline for the 2030 Agenda, progress on nearly half of all targets of the Sustainable Development Goals remains inadequate, with 35 per cent showing stagnation. In response, Secretary-General António Guterres initiated the Summit of the Future, with a view to reassessing our realities, revitalizing our commitments and amplifying our collective efforts. At the Summit, which was held just days ago (see A/79/PV.3), we engaged in discussions on policies, objectives and avenues for cooperation concerning sustainable development, science, technology, innovation, youth and the transformation of governance. I am pleased to note that Mongolia actively participated in the negotiation processes for the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), the Declaration on Future Generations and the Global Digital Compact, all of which were discussed and adopted at the Summit. The countries of the world, including our own, must work diligently and cooperate to implement the actions proposed. I am pleased to see that Heads of State and Government and their representatives have wholeheartedly supported those commitments and actions, voicing their positions from this very rostrum.
Our lives are rapidly evolving and becoming interdependent in this age of technological progress and digital advances. However, tensions, armed conflicts and wars continue to escalate in many parts of the world, fuelled by geopolitical tensions that are the result of prejudice, extreme ideologies, mistrust, misunderstanding and disrespect. Mongolia believes that strengthening multilateral cooperation based on international law and the Charter of the United Nations is essential to ensuring international peace and security. Dialogue, mutual understanding and trust are the foundations of sustainable and peaceful coexistence. In order to sustain peace, combat climate change, protect public health, reduce economic inequality and ensure justice, the international community must seek the best possible solutions and foster innovative cooperation in addressing the evolving dynamics of our era.
Presidential and parliamentary elections took place in more than 60 countries this year, with nearly half of the world’s population exercising their right to vote, making it a year of significant choices. In Mongolia we too held parliamentary elections, and I would like to highlight that both domestic and foreign observers, as well as international organizations, have commended the successful conduct of our elections within the legal framework. Mongolia has always consistently sought to contribute to the international community’s efforts to promote peace and security and sustainable development. In that regard, we have established diplomatic relations with all States Members of the United Nations and are dedicated to strengthening and developing friendly relations and cooperation with all countries around the world. As a nation that consistently pursues a peaceful, open, independent and multi-pillar foreign policy, Mongolia respects the pluralism inherent in the diverse histories, cultures, civilizations, religions, national interests and development paths of countries around the world. We strive to develop international relations based on multi-pillar principles.
My country therefore works to uphold the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly the commitment to refraining from using force to attack the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. In addressing disagreements and conflicts, we call on countries and nations around the world to prioritize diplomatic dialogue over confrontation, promote unity over hostility and pursue collective goals rather than divisiveness so that we can consistently cooperate in strengthening international peace and security.
We Mongols have a rich history of valuing and seeking amicable solutions through dialogue. For centuries the great Mongol empire used political and diplomatic means to engage in its relations with neighbouring, distant, allied and adversarial nations. That included sending and receiving envoys and ambassadors, concluding agreements, fostering friendships and conducting negotiations — practices that remain cornerstones of Mongolia’s current foreign policy. The Gerege serves as historical evidence of that legacy. It represents the origins of credentials given to envoys — like modern diplomatic passports — and has been used by Mongols since the thirteenth century in their relations with other nations. The Gerege is displayed as a historic artefact at United Nations Headquarters, and in 2000, the late former Secretary-General Kofi Annan remarked that the Gerege was an invaluable heritage gifted by Mongols to the international community, emphasizing that we have a lot to learn from the wisdom of our Mongolian ancestors.
The principle of maintaining peace and harmonious coexistence championed by our ancestors reflects the progressive ideals that underpin our current collective efforts to sustain peace and stability. Today humankind is concerned about the deepening global geopolitical tensions that are igniting the fires of war and heightening the nuclear threat. The collective efforts of countries around the world to promote non-proliferation, disarmament and the total elimination of nuclear weapons, as well as the expansion of nuclear-weapon-free zones, must not be overlooked. Mongolia has made significant contributions to the elimination of nuclear threats by having its nuclear-weapon-free status recognized at the international level. We reaffirm our commitment to continuing to pursue and support nuclear-weapon-free policies and initiatives. Mongolia calls on all countries to collaborate in ensuring peace and stability, particularly where creating a world free from nuclear threats is concerned, and we propose convening a special gathering on the issue within the framework of the United Nations.
Mongolia deeply appreciates the role played by United Nations peacekeepers — the Blue Helmets — who serve tirelessly and make significant contributions to international peace and security.
Owing to various factors, such as international terrorism, brutal acts of extremism and the growing number of refugees, the Blue Helmets are confronted with increasingly complex tasks under more challenging conditions. We must not forget that more than 4,370 United Nations peacekeepers, including military, police and civilian personnel, have lost their lives in the line of duty. Although Mongolia has a relatively small population, over the past 20 years, more than 20,000 peacekeepers have been deployed to hotspots around the world to contribute to the peace and security of humankind. In particular, in alignment with the woman and peace and security agenda of the Security Council, we aim to increase women’s participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, female officers account for 11 per cent of our peacekeepers. To ensure the competence of our peacekeepers, it is crucial to improve their psychological well-being. Therefore, Mongolia initiated and developed a pilot project for supporting peacekeepers and their families, which was submitted to the United Nations Department of Peace Operations.
In recent years, the rapid development of information and communications technologies has had a significant impact on the daily life of people and is seen as a factor that may fundamentally reshape the development of civilization in the future. In that connection, intensive discussions on information and communications technologies and artificial intelligence have arisen in international forums, and the recently adopted Global Digital Compact is a timely and essential step. Our country aims to keep pace with the development of information technology, placing great importance on United Nations resolutions, documents and other international legal frameworks related to that issue and keenly participating in their discussions. In March, the General Assembly adopted its first-ever resolution calling on Member States to ensure the reliability and security of artificial intelligence (resolution 78/265), in a significant step forward.
In order to accelerate the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, countries around the world are focusing on policies that promote economic diversification, energy and digital transitions, reduce the negative impacts of climate change, enhance adaptive capacity and increase access to essential social services, particularly in education and health, while also prioritizing employment and food security. On the other hand, global debt accumulation has reached unprecedented levels, with debt service payments in developing countries exceeding the amounts borrowed, further constraining the budgetary space needed to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Mongolia fully supports the international community’s efforts to not only ensure that sustainability, but also to fundamentally reform the international financial architecture under the initiative outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
In the early years of the twenty-first century, ideological conflicts that divided the world became history, while traditional military threats receded and such non-traditional threats as climate change, pandemics, terrorism, cybercrime and refugees gained increasing attention. However, that situation has changed drastically in recent years, with traditional threats resurfacing and negatively affecting international security and sustainable development. In other words, the overlap and expanding scope of traditional and non-traditional threats requires countries around the world to pay special attention and strengthen their collaborative efforts. In particular, global warming and climate change have transcended natural and economic boundaries, exacerbating sensitive social issues and disputes over resources and triggering migration, which brings with it numerous direct and indirect dangerous and risks. If this situation continues, humankind will face not only a choice between development or stagnation, but rather a choice between existence and nonexistence. Therefore, we must carefully assess the situation, recognize the need for smart solutions based on the advancements of our era and the implementation of new technologies and share good practices, while collaborating to overcome challenges posed by climate change.
As descendants of nomads, we Mongols have preserved and honoured our unique cultural heritage and traditions to this day. The origin of our nomadic civilization is, in fact, the philosophy of green development, which emphasizes caring for and protecting nature while responsibly utilizing its benefits. That indicates that we have substantial traditional wisdom and initiatives regarding the future of green development. Thus, in line with the Sustainable Development Goals and its Vision 2050 long-term development policy, Mongolia has successfully been implementing national movements and programmes such as on building, trees, food security and safety, Healthy Mongolia and Digital Mongolia. Those initiatives represent our contributions at both the international and regional levels to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. I am also pleased to announce that Mongolia is actively working to implement the resolution adopted by the General Assembly declaring 2026 the International Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists (resolution 76/253). Furthermore, we are also preparing to host the seventeenth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, in Ulaanbaatar in 2026. I am confident that the international community and Member States will support and collaborate with us in those efforts.
As a landlocked country, with its unique location on the Central Asian plateau and its extreme weather conditions, Mongolia has consistently paid particular attention to the issues of countries in similar special situations. We have already collaborated with them to safeguard our interests and make tangible contributions to amplifying our voices on the global stage. Mongolia and Austria co-chaired the Preparatory Committee for the third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries for 2023–2024 and successfully facilitated discussions on the draft outcome document among Member States. We are pleased that the draft programme of action to be adopted at the upcoming conference in Botswana in December includes innovative content outlining specific goals and measures to guide the development of landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) over the next decade. Therefore, we urge all LLDCs, transit countries and all States Members of the United Nations and development partners to engage at the highest level at the third Conference on LLDCs and to contribute creatively to discussions for the successful implementation of the programme of action.
At the fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995, it was proclaimed that women’s rights are human rights and human rights are women’s rights, setting forth the significant goal of eliminating barriers to gender equality on the global stage. We Mongols have a time-honoured culture and tradition of honouring and respecting women, with a history of Mongol queens and women who played crucial roles in governance and social affairs throughout our nation’s history. That rich traditional and cultural heritage have continued to advance Mongolia’s position as one of the leaders in promoting gender equality in Asia. In its first constitution, Mongolia became the first country in Asia to guarantee equal rights for women, including the right to vote and the right to be elected.
This year, we celebrate the centennial of the establishment of the National Organization for Women, the Mongolian women’s federation. As we approach that historic anniversary in 2023, we have implemented legal policy reform designed to enhance women’s participation at both the social and the political decision-making levels. As a result, in the recent parliamentary election, 25.4 per cent of elected members were women, exceeding the average rate of 21.2 per cent in Asia. Moreover, in August, our country successfully hosted the World Women’s Forum in Ulaanbaatar, under the theme “Towards a Green Future”, in collaboration with the United Nations. That forum brought together women leaders from Governments and international organizations and influential representatives from diverse sectors, social, economic and cultural across four continents. They proposed numerous creative initiatives to enhance the role of women and contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, including in the areas of economics, environment, climate change, food security, education, sports, culture and the arts. I am pleased to say that the Ulaanbaatar Declaration: Towards a Sustainable Future was adopted as the Forum’s outcome document. Building on the momentum of the World Women’s Forum, Mongolia will continue to actively promote gender equality and the empowerment of women.
The General Assembly is the most important and honourable rostrum we have for amplifying voices, ideas and aspirations in favour of international peace and security and the welfare and development of humankind. Mongolia has consistently supported the efforts of Member States to reform the Security Council so that it can become a more equitable, accessible, transparent, effective, democratic and responsible system. We also strongly advocate for further strengthening the central coordinating role of the United Nations in global affairs. Our country believes that any international challenges and misunderstandings should be addressed through mutual understanding, trust, respect and dialogue and be resolved within the framework of international legal norms. I therefore call on the Heads of State and Government and other representatives here to demonstrate exceptional leadership and make meaningful contributions to strengthening trust, mutual respect and cooperation among the nations of the world in the crucial pursuit of global peace, security, sustainable development and the well-being of humankind. May the eternal blue sky bless us with peace throughout the world.
