It is a great honour for me to address the Assembly and to convey to all participants in this session a special greeting from Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of the Republic of Mozambique.
We congratulate Mr. Philemon Young on his election as President of the General Assembly at the seventy-ninth session and wish him success in fulfilling his mandate. We extend our greetings to the other members of the Bureau. We assure him of our full support in carrying out his duties.
We also commend the positive work carried out by his predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis, which contributed to the strengthening of our Organization towards a more decisive approach to the peace and development agenda.
We extend a word of great appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres for his tireless dedication and advocacy in promoting multilateralism for global peace and security.
The current session of the General Assembly is a sovereign opportunity to reinforce multilateralism and our collective action to consolidate international peace and security for the well-being of humankind. Those renewed commitments were reinforced by the deliberations of the Summit of the Future and other important high-level events held recently. We therefore welcome the theme of our general debate, which has particular relevance due to its connection with the future, which requires urgent efforts to strengthen international cooperation so that, together, we can face the challenges faced by humankind today and build a prosperous present and the promising future for humankind.
We are aware that in just six years the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will expire and that the progress made on its implementation remains still tenuous. It is urgent to mobilize the resources necessary for its financing and for other internationally agreed development objectives in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. We therefore encourage all Member States to accelerate the materialization of the commitments made, including the reinforcement of mutually beneficial cooperation in responding to prevailing challenges, including the fight against poverty, conflict, terrorism and climate change.
We are optimistic about our collective future, where an environment of peace and security reigns. The functioning of our global institutions must keep up with the current dynamics imposed upon us. We therefore align ourselves with the voices defending the urgent need to reform the United Nations, especially at the level of the Security Council, so as to ensure greater inclusion, particularly giving a permanent voice to the African continent, thereby correcting the historical injustice to which it has been subject.
We are encouraged by the ongoing collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union to overcome conflicts in the context of maintaining international peace and security. Resolution 2719 (2023), adopted by the Security Council on 21 December 2023, is a significant milestone for African Union-led peace support operations. It strengthens collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union, promoting greater regional and national ownership of peace initiatives. We hope that it will effectively ensure access to the adequate, predictable and sustainable financing required for the operations of the African Union. We believe that this collaboration will help to strengthen efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts towards a prosperous and peaceful Africa, the Africa we want, as established in the Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
The concert of nations has been made feasible throughout these times by the collective observance of the sacrosanct objectives and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including the defence of the right to self-determination of peoples and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We are deeply concerned over the escalation of conflicts and tensions in various parts of the world.
In Ukraine, unfortunately, there are still no encouraging signs of an end to the conflict. We believe that the safest path is dialogue between the parties. It is up to all of us, as Members of the United Nations, to persuade the parties to the conflict to end hostilities and opt for dialogue towards peace between those two countries.
In the Middle East, in violation of the principles of international law and international humanitarian law, the conflict continues to claim civilian lives, particularly those of children, women and the elderly, and to destroy civilian infrastructure, causing the tragedy that we are regretfully witnessing. We call for a cessation of hostilities and the protection of innocent civilians in the conflict. The vision of the existence of two sovereign States, Israel and Palestine, as full Members of the United Nations is the fairest formula that will ensure sustainable peace and stability in that region.
In Africa, we are also concerned about the conflict in the Sudan, which has killed thousands of innocent civilians, including refugees, and caused an unprecedented humanitarian disaster. We reiterate our call on the parties to the conflict to end hostilities and the need for dialogue in order to restore peace and stability.
The use of sanctions and other unilateral coercive measures does not contribute to the preservation of peace, security and sustainable economic and social development. Unilateralism is contrary to the multilateralism enshrined in the Charter. In that context, we reiterate our film call for the total lifting of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on Zimbabwe and Cuba, which have had significant negative impacts on the populations of those countries and harmed their rights and well-being, so as to allow for more fair and equitable development.
In January 2023, Mozambique began its two-year term as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, from 2023 to 2024. With three months remaining until its end, we reiterate that it has been an honour and a privilege to serve on the United Nations organ responsible for maintaining international peace and security. Over the past two years, Mozambique has made its direct contribution to peace and security in the world, collaborating in addressing all topics on the Security Council’s agenda, amongst which we highlight peace and security in Africa, combating terrorism, women and peace and security, and the nexus between climate, peace and security. We presided over the Council in March 2023 and May 2024.
We have been chairing the ad hoc Working group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. We will soon end our mandate. We reaffirm our commitment to continuing to collaborate with a view to pursuing the goals that guide the Security Council in strengthening international peace and security. We therefore thank all Member States for the support they have given to Mozambique during its mandate and reaffirm our commitment to multilateralism and the principles and objectives set out in the United Nations Charter, which have guided our mandate since the beginning.
In Mozambique, we continue to consolidate our young democracy and citizenship, strengthen dialogue and seek consensus in the various forums of participatory representation. In that spirit, the seventh presidential and legislative elections and those for the provincial assemblies will take place on 9 October. In the fight against terrorism in the province of Cabo Delgado, our vigorous action against that phenomenon has made progress, with the support of the Southern African Development Community, Rwanda and international cooperation partners, despite the prevailing challenges. In that regard, we reiterate our appreciation and gratitude to all bilateral and multilateral partners that have spared no effort in supporting us in the fight against terrorism and for the restoration of peace and tranquillity to the victim populations and the reconstruction of economic and social infrastructure in areas affected by terrorist activities. Furthermore, our country has faced multiple and complex challenges, including exposure to risks associated with climate change, such as cyclical cyclones, droughts and floods. Those phenomena cause economic losses averaging around 1.1 per cent of our gross domestic product per year.
Finally, we reiterate the commitment of the Government of the Republic of Mozambique to international peace and security, which are essential factors for the well-being of humankind in this prosperous world.
