I would like to begin by extending my warmest congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang on his presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and by wishing him every success at its helm.
I would also like to commend His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for the immense wisdom and effectiveness with which he steered the work of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
Allow me also to express my great appreciation for the efforts of His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres to strengthen our Organization and enhance its role as an effective institutional expression of our collective will to address the various challenges that confront our world on the path to comprehensive sustainable development.
The theme of our summit — leaving no one behind and acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations — powerfully and clearly encapsulates the goals and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations while reflecting the depth of our collective awareness of the need to enhance our cooperation and coordinate our efforts in order to address the existing challenges. What the world has undergone and is currently experiencing, in terms of violent shocks and unprecedented crises at various levels, has considerably undermined our individual and collective ability to honour the commitments we made in the context of the Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The current international situation is having a very negative impact on efforts to achieve sustainable development, especially on our African continent, which is already affected by structural and circumstantial imbalances and obstacles that are hindering its development efforts and retarding its progress towards fulfilling the two harmonious Agendas: the United Nations Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063. Our continent continues to be blighted by poverty, vulnerability, unemployment, healthcare and educational systems that are of poor quality and lack universality, not to mention the spread of terrorism and armed conflict and the devastating effects of climate change. The bleak outlook in Africa greatly underscores the urgent need to relieve African countries of their enormous debt burden and to rectify the obvious imbalances in the development assistance system and in international governance, in terms of both political and financial governance, and to strengthen multilateral cooperation in general. Addressing all of those issues could propel the continent towards economic growth in a way that contributes to efforts to fulfil the commitments made by the international community in relation to the 2030 Agenda.
In line with those commitments, we, in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, have made achieving the Sustainable Development Goals the focus of all of our public policies. We have been able to make strides, be they slight, on many of the Sustainable Development Goal indicators, and that progress is reflected in our somewhat-improved ranking among the countries listed in the United Nations Global Sustainable Development Report 2024. That progress is the result of intensive efforts aimed at consolidating the rule of law and strong institutions, promoting democracy and individual and collective freedoms, using dialogue and consultation as a permanent tool in the management of public affairs, bolstering the independence of the judiciary, fostering transparency and combating all forms of corruption and bribery affecting administrative and financial matters. Our ongoing efforts to protect and promote human rights have also entailed combating modern and old forms of slavery and human trafficking, protecting the rights of women and children and combating irregular migration and cross-border crime.
On top of all that, we have been able to achieve security, peace and stability despite the current situation in our region and worldwide. Violence and terrorism continue to prevail, as do political and social crises, but with the help of Allah and our national integrated security strategy, we were able to make those gains. Likewise, we have afforded considerable attention to the role of young people in the country’s development and growth. Our focus is on developing plans and strategies to guarantee that young people receive an education, develop skills, are integrated into society and have a greater presence in various spheres of public life.
All of the above has contributed to greater national unity and social cohesion. To achieve that, we stepped up efforts to eliminate various forms of exclusion, injustice and vulnerability by creating an extensive and multifaceted social safety net that seeks to alleviate the burdens on the poorest arising from the limitations and precariousness of daily life so as to increase their resilience to those difficulties and to enhance their access to all public services. We have also launched promising educational reforms with the aim of establishing a republican schooling system that embodies the values of equality and fairness and guarantees everyone equal access to a high-quality education that will be a springboard for social advancement. In tandem, we have redoubled efforts to expand and improve the scope of the health services offered to our population and to ensure access to medication. We have introduced a health insurance system for citizens who are not covered by standard insurance programmes. In addition, we are providing some basic medical services free of charge, especially for mothers, older persons and persons with disabilities.
We are alive to the adverse effects of climate change and other environmental challenges on our planet, the economy and society, and we are aware of the political and security implications, in particular for the African continent and the Sahel, specifically. We have endeavoured to reduce our carbon emissions by 11 per cent and to raise the proportion of renewable energy sources in our total energy mix to 50 per cent by 2030. We intend to step up our efforts in that area and to introduce an extensive green hydrogen development programme. In addition to our efforts to promote clean energy technology, which now accounts for 48 per cent of our energy use, we are continuing to fight against desertification in the context of the Great Green Wall initiative and the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel.
Against that backdrop, I welcome the outcome of the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was hosted by the United Arab Emirates at the end of last year. It is my hope that those environmental gains will be consolidated at the upcoming session of the Conference, to be hosted by Azerbaijan this year, and that industrialized countries will honour their commitments to reduce their emissions and fulfil the pledges they made at the Paris conference in that regard.
We are deeply convinced, in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, that the effectiveness of cooperation among States depends on relationships based on friendship, trust and mutual respect. Therefore, we have built our foreign policy on non-interference in the internal affairs of States, strengthening cooperation and friendship, the maintenance of international peace and security and support for just causes based on international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of the African Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. In that context, we would like to state the following.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the war of genocide waged by Israel against the defenceless Palestinian people, in flagrant violation of international law and international humanitarian law. We call for an immediate end to that war. We reiterate our commitment to the right of the Palestinian people to dignity and sovereignty within the framework of an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as provided for in the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant international resolutions. We reiterate our condemnation of the current Israeli attacks on Lebanon and our demand that they be halted immediately.
We reiterate our call to find a solution that preserves the unity and sovereignty of the sisterly Libyan State and renew our commitment to fostering and supporting African and international efforts to that end.
We reiterate our support for the security and stability of the brotherly Sudan and its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We must ensure that dialogue and reason prevail in order to resolve the outstanding issues in a manner that leads to an immediate end of the war and alleviates the suffering of the brotherly Sudanese people while ensuring respect for international humanitarian law.
We reiterate our commitment to genuine efforts to achieve a political solution that preserves the unity of the Syrian Arab Republic, its independence, the dignity of its people and their right to live in peace and security.
We reiterate our support for legitimacy in brotherly Yemen. We call for peaceful solutions, in accordance with Arab initiatives and the relevant international resolutions.
We reiterate our firm position on the conflict in Western Sahara. We support the efforts of the United Nations and the implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions, with a view to finding a lasting solution that is acceptable to all.
We reiterate our concern about the continuation of the war between Russia and Ukraine and our demand that a solution be found that ends the war and takes into account the concerns of both parties in accordance with international law and the United Nations Charter, thus sparing the region and the world further tragedies and destruction.
The Summit of the Future, which concluded its work yesterday, revealed how aware we are of our collective responsibility towards our common future. Through the measures and plans adopted, the Summit confirmed that we are still able to usher in a future of security, peace, prosperity and comprehensive and sustainable development that will not exclude any population group or country. Let us therefore strengthen mutual trust, intensify our multilateral cooperation and accelerate the reform of international, political and financial governance rules in order to make them more just, balanced and equitable. And then, God willing, we will be able to save our planet from the abyss and secure a bright future for current and future generations.
