I warmly congratulate you, Mr. President. Mauritius is proud to see a son of Africa assume the high office of President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I assure you, Sir, of the full support of Mauritius. We remain committed to the universal values and noble aspirations of the United Nations. Our appreciation also goes to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis, who, throughout the seventy-eighth session, championed solidarity and unity during challenging times. Secretary-General António Guterres also deserves our special recognition for his inspiring and commendable initiatives in furthering the objectives of our Organization.
The theme being addressed in this Assembly session is in consonance and resonates deeply with the very essence of our Organization. The United Nations emerged out of the ashes of war and untold suffering. We have a moral obligation to ensure that the ultimate sacrifice of millions of women and men was not in vain. Ever since, our Organization has embodied the universal values of peace, justice, equity, respect for the rule of law and human dignity.
It is appalling that we are witnessing an erosion of those same values of late. Unfortunately, might is taking over, and impunity still prevails. The dignity of the weakest is being shamelessly flouted, on a scale never seen before. Behind protracted conflicts around the world lies an inestimable human cost.
The devastation and sufferings in Gaza are heart-wrenching. Thousands of innocent lives have been lost. We urge the international community to find a solution aimed at de-escalation in the region in order to establish a just and lasting peace. And we are convinced that the two-State solution, based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and international law, will uphold human dignity and equality for all. We welcome the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences arising from the policies and practices of Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
There is an urgent need for a renewed commitment to diplomacy and constructive dialogue, as conflicts, instability and challenges to security remain unabated in many parts of the world.
The world has witnessed an unprecedented technological revolution in a short span of time. In order for humankind to benefit from the transformative power of artificial intelligence (AI), AI governance should be anchored in international law. Current unsustainable consumption and production trends are exacerbating injustices and inequalities.
We are at a watershed moment. Mauritius welcomes the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which is a renewed testimony to our collective resolve to achieve the betterment of our world. We also need to ensure that the overall architecture of our global institutions reflects today’s realities.
Mauritius believes that inclusivity is a necessity, not a choice. All States, small and large alike, deserve a voice. Africa and small island developing States have a rightful place in a reformed Security Council. Multilateral and international financial institutions should be more representative and also responsive to the needs of all countries. That is the only way to pave the way for a more equitable and resilient world, in which human dignity is upheld.
Mauritius believes that human dignity is universal, inalienable and unconditional; that conviction has always guided our actions. Our multicultural society thrives on fairness, equity and human dignity. Through unity in diversity, we have strengthened our unique and tolerant society. We have spared no effort in advancing the economic, social and cultural rights of our citizens. Our commitment to free and fair elections, good governance and putting people at the centre of development remains resolute. We are investing heavily in, for example, free healthcare, infrastructural development and free education from pre-primary to tertiary level. We are promoting decent work for all. The empowerment of women and youth remains at the heart of the Government’s actions. Those inclusive approaches and supportive policies have contributed to the strengthening of our social fabric.
The climate emergency is one of the most pressing global threats of our time. Greenhouse gas emissions from human activities have irrefutably contributed to global warming, sea level rise and coastal erosion. It is most unfortunate that small island developing States (SIDS), such as Mauritius, which have contributed the least to global emissions, are being affected most. A multilateral approach to confront those threats is an absolute necessity. We must achieve the highest possible ambition while ensuring equity and common and differentiated responsibilities. Our actions must be guided by the latest scientific insights and informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake agreed on at the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, including its road map for keeping 1.5°C within reach. That target is a lifeline for all of us, especially SIDS. Therefore, an agreement on a fair and ambitious new collective quantified goal on climate finance is imperative. As temperatures rise, the very foundations of life for ocean States are endangered. We welcome the recent advisory opinion of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on climate change. It stands as a juridical lighthouse, compelling all States to chart a new course, guided by science and the moral imperative of intergenerational equity. In the fight against climate change, our resolve should be translated into concrete and time-bound action that is commensurate with the urgency and scale of the climate crisis.
Mauritius has ratified the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, underscoring our commitment to protecting our ocean resources and ensuring sustainable marine governance. We are fully committed to the implementation of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for Small Island Developing States (resolution 78/317, annex), adopted earlier this year. The openness of SIDS’ economies makes us more vulnerable to external shocks. SIDS should be able to access global value chains for green jobs. We welcome innovative approaches and the use of the multidimensional vulnerability index for enhancing the effectiveness of access to concessional finance.
Mauritius has been — and remains — fully committed to the advancement of its African continent. Africa is a land of untapped opportunities. However, our continent is faced with several challenges preventing it from realizing its full potential. Our Agenda 2063, including the African Continental Free Trade Area, has the ability to propel Africa. Our continent also resonates with cultural richness and stands united in purpose. Africa, with its youth dividend, stands ready to contribute to global solutions in shaping a more equitable and sustainable world for a better tomorrow. We call on the international community to participate in Africa’s transformative journey.
Mauritius and the United Kingdom are still pursuing negotiations on the exercise of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, following the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 25 February 2019. Several rounds of talks have taken place so far, and Mauritius continues to be engaged in those talks in good faith. We urge the United Kingdom to conclude expeditiously an agreement that would allow for the completion of the decolonization of Mauritius and the implementation of a resettlement programme for the former inhabitants of the Chagos Archipelago in accordance with Mauritian laws. Such an agreement would also protect and preserve vital security interests on Diego Garcia. We also appeal to France to resolve the dispute over Tromelin, which forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius, in the spirit of friendship that characterizes the relations between our two countries.
Before concluding, I wish to emphasize that the United Nations remains the ideal platform for bringing us together to address global challenges for a peaceful and more equitable world. We must also recognize the contribution of the United Nations, its agencies and its dedicated personnel.
We are convinced that the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) will serve as the guiding star leading us to an improved world for tomorrow’s generations. I am confident that, together, we can forge a better, brighter and more equitable world where no one is left behind, where human dignity and human rights prevail and where collective good for humankind remains at the core of lasting peace and prosperity.
