Every State Member of the United Nations relates to other nations in the world on three dimensions — cooperation, competition and conflict — and how we manage our relationships on those dimensions will ultimately determine the kind of world we will create for the children of tomorrow. So when we sit in the Hall to deliberate on cooperation, competition or conflict among Member States, we are actually designing and deciding our future.
I am therefore glad that the theme of our debate this year touches on all three of those dimensions, because the bottom line is that in all three we can and must do better. This year’s theme calls on us to act together to advance peace, sustainable development and dignity. That is a call to stronger multilateral cooperation, but if we are serious about cooperation then we must act with a sense of urgency in fixing and reforming the United Nations and other multilateral institutions.
One fix that we from Africa demand is for the United Nations to embrace democracy in the Security Council by giving Africa two permanent seats with veto power. When I first made that call in my inaugural address in the Hall (see A/77/PV.9), I was delighted to hear President Biden also announce that the United States was in favour of that reform. Similarly, when I met with President Xi Jinping of China three weeks ago, I was delighted to hear that he, too, was in favour of stronger representation of the interests of developing countries in the Security Council. So the time to fix that is now. We need that fix to strengthen our voice on the issues that matter to us in Africa.
In the four years that I have been President, I have declared a state of natural disaster every year because of climate change impacts that we cannot solve without multilateral cooperation. For one of those years, I was Chair of two development communities — the Southern Africa Development Community and the group of least developed countries — and I learned first-hand that no nation can survive a global crisis or develop in the face of shocks without strong multilateral cooperation to sustain it.
Even this year, I see how challenging it has been for my country and for Malawians. Coming off the back of the state of natural disaster that I declared last year to secure international cooperation in response to the devastation caused by Cyclone Freddy, I have had to declare another state of natural disaster this year to secure international cooperation in response to the El Niño weather conditions that have destroyed crops in three-quarters of the country’s districts, leaving a fifth of the Malawian population without enough food to last the year. That is happening in the face of the devastating trauma we have suffered as a nation for the past three months from the tragic death of our Vice President, Mr. Saulos Claus Chilima, in a plane crash whose cause is yet to be established by the German experts we have asked to investigate the accident — yet another example of the necessity of international cooperation.
Even the great strides of development we have made over the past four years have been facilitated by strong international cooperation. Whether it be the four road corridors and hundreds of secondary schools we are constructing through our cooperation with the United States; or the M1 road we are rehabilitating and expanding through our cooperation with the European Union; or the railway system we have revived for the first time in 40 years through our cooperation with China; or the orthopaedic and neurosurgery hospital we have developed through our cooperation with Norway; or the Makanjira Road we are ready to develop through our cooperation with Saudi Arabia; or the investments we are making to strengthen education and governance institutions through our co operation with the United Kingdom; or the solar power plants we have developed through our cooperation with Japan; or the Extended Credit Facility from the International Monetary Fund that has unlocked our access to the World Bank’s budgetary and International Development Association support through our cooperation with development partners; or the life-saving food assistance we mobilized for the people of Mangochi, following the impact of Tropical Storm Ana, through our cooperation with Iceland; or our implementation of social protection programmes to help rural women enjoy economic empowerment through our cooperation with Ireland; or the procurement of emergency food, fertilizers and climate-resilient seeds for climate-ravaged Malawian communities through our cooperation with Tanzania, Ukraine, Egypt, Iceland, Russia, Morocco and many others, Malawi is a testament to the power of cooperation to move a nation’s development forward into an inclusively wealthy and sustainable future that is brighter than the past.
It is in fact that foundation of international cooperation that we have built on to actively engage in intergovernmental negotiations on the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) that we are fully endorsing at the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly. It is also that foundation of international cooperation that we have built on to host 80 international organizations and institutions for our second annual Malawi Partners Conference, right here in New York, to get investor alignment for our “ATM” strategy of boosting productivity and value addition in the sectors of agriculture, tourism and mining that hold the greatest promise for Malawi’s economic transformation.
If the future belongs to nations that know how to leverage the power of international cooperation, then the future belongs to Malawi. If the future belongs to nations with an unapologetic commitment to multilateral collaboration, then the future belongs to Malawi. If the future belongs to nations that are driven by the moral conviction to uphold the values of servant-leadership, shared prosperity, ending corruption and the rule of law, then the future belongs to Malawi. If the future belongs to nations that have adopted a no-retreat and no-surrender attitude towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, then the future belongs to Malawi. If the future belongs to nations that put their children first, the way that Malawi has done by resolving to end child marriage and the poisoning of children with lead products by 2030, that future belongs to Malawi.
But our efforts to move forward in fifth gear are being significantly slowed by a global system of multilateral agencies and financial institutions that are too slow, too inefficient, too monolithic and too undemocratic for the kind of speedy and tailor-made interventions we need. As a result of the refusal to practice the democracy of equal representation here in the United Nations, our calls for Member States to practice democracy in their own jurisdictions are beginning to fall on deaf ears. As a result of the refusal to honour climate financing pledges or link them to debt relief, the debt-to-gross domestic product ratios in developing countries like Malawi are growing at an alarming rate, posing a significant threat to global financial stability. If that is not fixed, those who keep us in a state of perpetual debt when they have the resources to cancel those debts should make no mistake — the spreading debt crisis in the developing world is a cancer that will make their own economies unsafe. So the time to fix that is now.
I said that the second dimension of international relations is competition, and again in that area we all can and must do better. There is nothing wrong with healthy competition among nations because competition fuels innovation, improves quality and multiplies options for citizens, which is the essence of freedom. But as we have done in global sports, we must make competition among nations fair by regularly reviewing and revising the rules on which our international system is based so as to ensure that the way nations compete and what they compete for is not rigged to disenfranchise some countries as we compete for natural resources, international markets, financial support and new technologies, which are currently skewed against the global South.
Even with the era of artificial intelligence being fully upon us, I worry that the rules for regulating that arena are already being written to empower some nations and give them unfair advantages over others. We need more than a rules-based system; we also need the rules themselves to foster fair competition. Of course, what that means is that we need stronger governance institutions that can enforce fair rules for accessing education, markets, technology, financing and natural resources.
It is therefore my central contention that the one place where we must have strong governance is here. If governance is weak here, there will be no one to regulate the collaboration and competition among nations in an equitable manner, and it is that absence of equity that is at the root of unwinnable conflict in Eastern Europe, in Palestine, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and counting. So we need governance reform to make the United Nations stronger, because the world needs a strong United Nations that can be good and peaceful, not a weak United Nations that can only be harmless — and we need it now.
