Representing Malaysia, I stand before the General Assembly today to reiterate our commitment to peace, in line with the values enshrined in our Charter. It has been 79 years since the founding of the United Nations. From the dust of the Second World War, we emerged, many of us as new nation States, with a shared goal of building a safer world.
Yet, for many of us, it is not a safer world than it was 79 years ago. For many, it has only become a deadlier world. It has become a world in which war can be waged remotely and with impunity; a world in which a drone strike can fatally interrupt a lesson in a school, a surgery in a hospital or a convoy delivering humanitarian aid. We have laws against such practices, yet our calls for peace are repeatedly ignored and vetoed away. In other words, it is a world in which the mighty continue to silence the meek, with far more powerful weapons than before.
Nowhere does that ring truer, of course, than in Gaza. We stand at a critical juncture in world history, given the failure of global governance to address the genocide of Palestinians. The abysmal failure of world leaders to end those horrendous crimes has echoed across the world. Yet, there are also many of us who have pursued justice for the people of Gaza. For almost a year now, we have raised our voices in protest and sought to establish a ceasefire. Again and again, our voices have been shut down in the Security Council through the power of veto.
It is clear that the mechanisms of the Security Council have been abused to enable mass atrocities. Our failure to establish a ceasefire is no longer justifiable. We have run out of excuses. It is time to address the problem. The veto should not be exercised at will. There must be exceptions in cases of crimes against humanity and attacks on civilian infrastructure. We must commit ourselves to reforming the United Nations. Justice begins with ending impunity and ensuring accountability. For that to happen, the undemocratic veto must be limited or abolished altogether. The humiliating paralysis of the Security Council must be corrected through the empowerment of the General Assembly, where the voices of the majority prevail. It must be understood that our willingness to reform is a matter of life and death for countless innocent people. There are children dying between missile strikes and between the words that we speak today.
The theme of this session of the General Assembly is “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. In the spirit of that effort, it fills us with hope to see the representatives of the State of Palestine seated among us today. Malaysia lauds the 143 Member States that supported extending the United Nations principle of equality among nations to the State of Palestine this year, and we strongly urge the remaining minority to join the majority. It is time to realize Palestine’s right to statehood and full membership of the Assembly.
It is only through the elevation of dialogue and diplomacy that we can seek a long-lasting solution — not through collective punishment, not through man-made famine and not through impunity and disregard for international law. Indeed, the elevation of dialogue and respect for international law has been compromised in the Assembly for some time now. Israel has violated every international law there is, including the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the Geneva Conventions and core human rights treaties. Just months ago, the world witnessed Israel’s mockery and utter disrespect of the United Nations in this very Hall, with its insolent shredding of the Charter of the United Nations. Israel’s actions, with each passing day, raise our doubts as to whether it actually believes in the United Nations system or values its membership in the Organization. Its illegal occupation has entrenched a system of apartheid and discrimination against Palestinians. The Israeli regime has itself declared its intent to wipe out an entire population. That is without question a genocide.
The United Nations must not remain idle. We must urgently utilize the existing processes founded by the General Assembly, along with mechanisms developed by the Human Rights Council. Malaysia calls on the international community to reinstitute the United Nations Special Committee Against Apartheid. Furthermore, Malaysia demands that the Security Council invoke its powers under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and impose an immediate arms embargo against Israel.
Therefore, our task is threefold. First, we must limit or abolish the veto. Secondly, we must continue to empower the voices of the oppressed within the General Assembly. Thirdly, we must halt the flow of weapons to rogue States that have proven a hundred times over their willingness to commit crimes against humanity. Although the powerful few may behave as though might is right, let there be no question that in the United Nations, the voice of the majority will not go ignored. Indeed, we must empower smaller countries to meet the challenges of our time.
The international landscape is in flux, replete with super-Power rivalries, global economic uncertainties, climate change, unequal development and the many misfortunes that come with it. Countries situated in South-East Asia are not exempt from these worries. Yet through the decades, we have not only endured but overcome many of our shared hurdles together. We have achieved that together the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) way. Through ASEAN, we have propelled ourselves forward within the international architecture by bolstering peace, security, economy and regional identity.
Yet, the years ahead will profoundly test ASEAN resilience, ASEAN shared norms and identity and ASEAN processes and mechanisms. Malaysia stands ready to assume the chairmanship of ASEAN in 2025 and we are fully cognizant of repositioning ASEAN in the driver’s seat of the Asia-Pacific region. Our chairmanship will focus on the region’s drive for future-readiness. We will emphasize the reinforcement of global aspirations, inclusive and people-driven policies and future-oriented mechanisms. We will aim to fortify ASEAN centrality amid the emergence of multilateral pacts affecting the region. That is a key step to preventing the region from becoming entrapped in unnecessary geopolitical rivalry or possible escalation.
ASEAN centrality must also involve managing the most critical issue of the South China Sea. That body of water, rich in resources and carrying vital shipping lanes, has become a flashpoint of rising geopolitical tensions. The scalation of rhetoric is a dangerous path to follow. We must not allow the situation to become dominated by growing distrust. That benefits no one; it only further undermines security and destabilizes global trade. We must collectively pursue a different vision of the South China Sea — a future in which the region is a zone of peace, stability and cooperation. We must adopt a collaborative approach, embedded in diplomacy and dialogue. I therefore call upon all countries to abide by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in their conduct of maritime governance. We must prioritize peaceful coexistence.
That is also one of the many reasons that the member States must continue to work together with regard to Myanmar. We will push for stronger humanitarian assistance and adherence to the ASEAN five-point consensus to seek solutions. We will do so as one. The diversity of our region, far from being an obstacle, is symbolic of our power to build bridges. It goes without saying that our stewardship of ASEAN will therefore emphasize continuous dialogue with our partners, as well as the adaptability needed to engage with different challenges and stakeholders. Malaysia will strive to realize our common desire and collective will to live in a region of lasting peace, security and stability, sustained economic growth, social progress and ultimately, shared prosperity. Yes, shared prosperity — that is the ghost of geopolitics, often spoken of but never seen.
The countries of the global South have continued to be marginalized and remain underrepresented on many fronts: global socioeconomic development, climate mitigation efforts, education, health care and infrastructure development. International mechanisms fail to adapt to current realities, often isolating and penalizing developing countries, placing the burden of environmental guilt on them while disregarding our very real needs. The lack of infrastructure, technology and resources has prevented developing countries from fully engaging in international systems and aspirations. One of the primary challenges is equitable access to financing for development. Innovative and new models of financing for development that drive sustainability, conservation, climate action and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals should be part of new multilateral solutions.
The climate crisis may be the most pressing challenge of our time. It is no longer a distant threat; it has flooded our doorsteps. It transcends borders by disrupting economies and displacing entire communities. The scientific data has spoken. We are witnessing unprecedented levels of warming, extreme weather and the devastating impacts of rising sea levels. National efforts alone will not suffice. The climate crisis requires global solutions in the form of climate financing, technology transfer and capacity-building.
We must continue to push for a just and equitable approach in meeting the development needs of the global South. At the same time, Malaysia advocates the importance of global South unity. We have a broader vision of promoting peace, development and a stable multipolar order through the empowerment of the voices of the South. The countries of the global South hold massive potential to further the pursuit of peace and justice around the world through solidarity among developing nations and through mutual support and understanding. That is fundamental to ensuring fair and equitable progress for all. The global South demands attention. We must not leave anyone behind.
Unfortunately, global trends are pointing in the opposite direction. Around the world, we are witnessing an upsurge in hate speech and violence towards minorities. The past few years have been shadowed by the rise of Islamophobia in particular. We are appalled by the alarming trend of hatred, intolerance and acts of violence against Muslims. That cannot continue. In the era of globalization, there is room for everyone to coexist, and it is our job, under the banner of a united world, to ensure that peace will prevail.
We must take action now. Malaysia urges the prompt appointment of a United Nations special envoy to combat Islamophobia. We stand ready to support any efforts undertaken by the United Nations towards nurturing dialogue among communities that will promote worldwide acceptance and understanding. While Islamophobia is a threat to Muslims, the broader issue of hatred against the followers of any religion will undermine the universal values of justice and peace that we have all vowed to protect.
We stand on the eve of 80 years of the United Nations. We have achieved wonders together. Ours is a story of the modern successes of humankind. Together, we have delivered food to the starving. We have eradicated diseases. We took decisive action against apartheid in the twentieth century, and we must do it again now. Let our commitment to justice never fail, no matter how formidable the task. Let there be no doubt — the question of Gaza is a direct test of the capability of the United Nations. Let that 76-year-old issue not age into a century of our failure to uphold justice. We strongly call for an end to the occupation and for the Israeli regime to comply with the decision of the International Court of Justice. Let our dreams of a free Palestine live beyond today and beyond the words that we have uttered.
