Namibia congratulates His Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang, President of the General Assembly. I also extend my appreciation to his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis, for successfully steering the Assembly through trying times. It was during the seventy-eighth session that the relevance of the Assembly’s work repeatedly came to the fore through reaffirmations.
The theme of this general debate, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, aligns perfectly well with our shared aspirations for effective international cooperation. In that regard, the adoption on 23 September of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) and its annexes was encouraging. Namibia is proud to have served alongside Germany as co-facilitator of the Summit of the Future. I congratulate all delegates for their commitment, which brought the Pact to fruition.
Namibia’s interest in the Pact for the Future is grounded in the understanding that multilateral institutions, including the Security Council, do not represent African needs and aspirations. The institutions created in 1945 must better respond to today’s challenges. At the core of the Pact is that recognition and the urgency of profound global transformation. At the heart of our quest to rebuild trust in multilateralism is a legitimate demand to be recognized as equal partners — partners who can be trusted and partners in the fight against war, poverty, global injustices and inequalities.
Namibia is particularly concerned about the impact of climate change. Changes in ocean temperatures have affected our fish stocks, with potential long-term consequences for our livelihoods, ecosystems and tourism. Namibia and the rest of the Southern African Development Community region are going through the El Niño phenomenon, which has adversely affected our food security. In that regard, Namibia had to declare a state of emergency to address the severe effects of drought.
As we approach the thirtieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, we are presented with a renewed opportunity to strengthen gender equality. Namibia remains among the top nine countries globally that have closed at least 80 per cent of the gender gap. In the past 12 months, we have achieved perfect parity in the National Assembly, in which 50 per cent of representatives are women. Namibia is preparing for the eighth presidential and national assembly elections on 27 November 2024. Political parties, including the ruling party, which I represent, have nominated female candidates. We hope that the United Nations will have a female Secretary-General in the near future.
Namibia is working to develop a sustainable energy mix to support its ambitious industrialization agenda and to contribute to the world’s efforts to combat climate change. We are establishing green industrialization ecosystems for decarbonizing industries that find it difficult to lower their greenhouse emissions. Investment in those key sectors is critical, and Namibia is urging developed nations to scale up support for developing countries to facilitate gradual energy transitions.
Turning to international peace and security, there is an urgent need for the Assembly to support the modalities to actualize the advisory opinion rendered by the International Court of Justice regarding the ongoing conflict in Gaza. Prolonged occupation does not justify or make acceptable the hardships and injustices endured. That is particularly true for the people of Gaza, who continue to be brutally massacred. As a country that has endured genocide, Namibia believes that Israel, by intent and by action, is committing genocide. Namibia continues to call for a ceasefire and for humanitarian assistance to flow unhindered into Gaza.
Economic hardships continue to affect the sister Republic of Cuba, in stark contrast to the ideals of inclusivity and the goal of leaving no one behind. Namibia calls for the end of the economic, financial and commercial blockade against Cuba and calls for the removal of Cuba from lists of States that are accused of sponsoring terrorism. Namibia also reiterates its call for the immediate and unconditional lifting of illegal sanctions against our neighbour Zimbabwe, which hinder the country’s ability to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
A further affront to the Charter of the United Nations and its purposes and principles is the continued disenfranchisement of the people of Western Sahara, who are being denied their right to self-determination. The seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly must do more to change that situation.
In conclusion, Namibia is a child of international solidarity and, having been midwifed by the United Nations, it therefore remains its firmest of proponents. The United Nations system can be strengthened if we hold hands and work together as bridge-builders, as illustrated by the Summit of the Future. By choosing the path of collaboration over that of enmity, peaceful dialogue over war and conflict and de-escalation over escalation, we can achieve our shared goal of a more peaceful, just and prosperous world.
