I would like to begin by extending my warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my warmest thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, for his outstanding work during his term, despite a global context in turmoil. Sadly, I can go no further with my congratulations, as representatives will soon understand.
A year ago, in this very Hall and at this very rostrum, my country, the Niger, was unjustly and unjustifiably deprived of the floor. That is not the worst of it. We were told of the rationale for that decision at the time but, worse yet, representatives of other countries in the same situation as mine were allowed to speak and were even received with honours by the Secretary-General. I am sure that everyone will readily agree with me that a double standard is in play that is likely to undermine the credibility of our common Organization. My country accepted that decision with dignity, but it felt the snub. That is why my statement will be focused in particular on those who have been left behind and on human dignity.
Human dignity dovetails perfectly with the ideals of the reconstruction under way in the Niger. Some have been left behind, however, as a result of multifaceted conflicts and violence, inequalities, the lack of solidarity and the marginalization of a large part of the population of our planet who aspire to a better world. In that regard, I would like to welcome the participation in this session of Palestine, which has been left behind. We hope that its well-deserved presence among us will constitute a decisive step towards the advent of a free, independent and sovereign Palestinian State, living in peace with its neighbours within its 1967 borders. The Niger reaffirms its support for the Palestinian cause and believes that only a two-State solution can put an end to the cycle of violence and guarantee peace and security in the region. My country also deplores the situation in Lebanon and calls for an immediate end t o hostilities.
Every year, we engage in the ritual of lamenting the situation of poor countries and pleading for a more equitable world, but we have to admit that we meet too much and do too little in a world in which we are supernumerary. At a time when poor countries are treading water, as the young people put it, not to say sinking into the morass, the rich are lining their pockets with our resources and continuing to support corrupt and subservient regimes that rig elections and plunge their people into total poverty. Meanwhile, the international community is wallowing in a complicit silence that once again reflects a policy of double standards.
From this rostrum, I launch a vibrant appeal to the exploited and abandoned peoples and tell them that it is not up to the wealthy countries to find solutions for us. I affirm that those solutions are ours to define. They consist of giving up mendicant and degrading aid for a dignified partnership in which our natural resources will be sold at their true worth and the profits invested for the benefit of our populations. It is in that spirit that my country manages with its own funds the damage and the humanitarian crisis born of the unprecedented floods that it is suffering this year. We do not need a lesson in democracy. What matters to us are the interests, choices and aspirations of our valiant peoples. As the President of the Conseil national pour la sauvegarde de la patrie (CNSP) and Head of State, Brigadier General Abdourahamane Tiani, has said, “No State, no inter-State organization will dictate to my country the conduct to be adopted, much less its agenda in terms of strategic or diplomatic partnership”.
As everyone knows, for over a decade the Sahel region has been in the grip of a serious security crisis that threatens the very existence of its States and constitutes a notorious attack on international peace and security. In order to face together the common challenges that assail them, particularly security, the three States under the leadership of Captain Ibrahim Traoré, President of Faso; Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali; and Brigadier General Abdourahamane Tiani, President of the Conseil national pour la sauvegarde de la patrie and Head of State of the Niger, signed on 16 September 2023 the Liptako-Gourma Charter establishing the Alliance of Sahel States (AES).
Today, we note both the strong support of the populations and the military successes achieved on the ground by our defence and security forces in the fight against terrorism and transnational crime. I take this opportunity to welcome the creation of the Unified Force of the AES and the smooth coordination between the units established. I pay a vibrant tribute to all the civilian and military victims of violence in the Sahel.
On the occasion of the historic Summit of Heads of State of the AES, held in Niamey on 6 July, the Alliance was transformed into a confederation based on three pillars: defence/security, diplomacy and development. That new strategic framework for integration, intended to eventually become a federation, has great potential in natural resources to achieve its objectives. That potential is coveted by certain Western Powers that finance and arm terrorist groups in order to destabilize our countries.
The Niger reiterates its firm condemnation of those hostile acts and rejects any form of support for terrorism, in particular the active and publicly acknowledged support of Ukraine for the terrorist coalition that launched a cowardly attack on the town of Tinzawaten in Mali. This is also the right moment to denounce the subversive actions and the new recolonization strategy claimed and implemented by France, which informs, trains, finances and arms terrorist groups in the Sahel. It offers lodging and meals to its local lackeys, some of whom occupy the Niger’s diplomatic premises in Paris, in flagrant violation of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Far from interrupting the current dynamic in the Sahel region, those attempts at destabilization only strengthen the determination of our countries to move forward in pursuit of the objectives set. Despite all those adversities, the AES caravan is moving forward.
Regardless of what others may feel, the AES now constitutes a new geopolitical dispensation that intends to fully play its role on the international stage, while respecting the sovereignty and free choice of its partners. As Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the AES Confederation, said on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Alliance:
“In our dynamic of independence and regained sovereignty, we
remain open to cooperation with brotherly and friendly peoples in a spirit of fraternity and mutual respect.”
At the national level, the inclusive vision of the President of the CNSP and Head of State, Brigadier General Abdourahamane Tiani, is structured around the following four strategic axes: strengthening security and social cohesion, promoting good governance, developing production bases and accelerating social reforms. Those axes seek to ensure the security, political and socioeconomic sovereignty of our country. In that regard, they constitute the frame of reference for all interventions by the State and its partners to create conditions for the structural transformation of the Nigerien economy and improve the well-being of the population. To support that transformation, particularly in the mining and oil sector, my country is willing to enter into partnerships with foreign investors based on the win-win principle and respect for the dignity of our populations, who have been left behind until now. The objective is to make the Sahel a zone of peace and prosperity, as President Tiani has affirmed.
I cannot conclude without thanking the brother and friendly countries Burkina Faso, Mali, Togo, Morocco, Türkiye, Russia, China, Iran and all those who support the Niger in its rebuilding process. I would ask our nationals in the diaspora, wherever they may be, to continue to pray that God will protect the AES, our peoples and our Governments. Long live solidarity among peoples! Long live the AES Confederation!
