As the President assumes the leadership of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, our world is confronted by profound moral questions whose resolution will require more than the habitual remarks from this elevated rostrum. They are questions about the ultimate purpose of our Organization — the United Nations itself — and how it can remain relevant and resilient. It is with those sentiments that I want to convey to the President the warm and fraternal greetings of my countrymen and women and their congratulations on his assumption of the presidency of the Assembly. Let me assure him of my delegation’s full cooperation in the discharge of his onerous responsibilities during his tenure. In the same vein, I would like to express my appreciation to his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis, for the many remarkable achievements recorded during his stewardship.
It gives me particular pleasure to commend His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres for his commitment to the cause of peace and development and the democratization of the United Nations to reflect the need to correct the historical injustice that has been done to Africa. I am also delighted to note the steadfast support given to the Secretary-General by our own sister and compatriot, Deputy-Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, as she shares the burden of leadership and responsibility in leading a complex organization like the United Nations.
The theme of this year’s General Assembly leaves us in no doubt that there is still work to be done to bridge the gap between the aspirations and the realities confronting our world today. It also underscores the need to remind ourselves that the United Nations stands for inclusiveness, anchored on the tripod of peace, sustainable development and human rights. Today the pillars of the Organization are threatened. They risk being broken by the relentless pursuit of individual national priorities, rather than the collective needs of the nations that are assembled here today. While commitment to multilateralism offers us the surest guarantee of global action to address the existential challenges we face, singularity and nationalism are undermining the aspirations towards the peaceful and collective resolution of such challenges. From last year’s summit, and indeed from previous years, we have carried over the numerous challenges of terrorism, armed conflict, inequality, poverty, racial discrimination, human rights abuses, food crises, hunger, irregular migration, piracy, global pandemics, hyperinflation, nuclear proliferation, the grinding debt burden, climate change and a host of other vexations. The continued manifestation of those challenges attests to our failings rather than to any lofty achievements on our part. Billions of dollars are being committed to the prosecution of wars and the fanning of the embers of conflict.
Yet we always recoil from bringing out the resources we need to build peace and deliver life’s necessities to people. The question of governance is at the heart of our problems and also the solution to them. We recognized that in Nigeria when, on 12 June, we celebrated a quarter of a century of unbroken democratic rule. We are no less proud of that achievement than the fact that, during the past two decades, a sustained process of democratization has swept over Africa. However, the return of unconstitutional changes of Government and forceful military takeovers in some countries of the Sahel underscore the fragility of democracy when it is not backed by economic development and sustained peace and security. It is such fragility, rather than the milestones that democratic governance has achieved in Africa, that should matter most in our deliberations at this and other high-level segments of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. While we abhor all forceful changes of Government, we can also recognize the impatience in cities and villages over the sometimes-slow and grinding turn of the wheel of democracy. Our people need employment. They need decent livelihoods. They desire good and affordable education and healthcare for their children and families. They need to live in healthy, safe and secure environments. They need hope, and they need opportunity. They desire to live in peace and tranquillity to pursue whatever gives them happiness and contentment. When Governments fail to deliver, the people are bound to question the utility of democracy and other ideals like the rule of law.
The global debt burden undermines the capacity of countries and Governments to meet the needs of their citizens. Creeping trade barriers and protectionist policies are destroying the hopes for prosperity of peoples and nations. Unbridled competition rather than cooperation is discouraging incentives and driving away investments. Above all, insecurity is driving people into unprecedented hardship and misery that, in turn, affect the people’s confidence in democracy. It is the duty of the international community to bring back confidence in democratic rule and constitutional order by paying more attention to the needs and aspirations of the people, rather than paying lip service to human rights, sustainable development and peace. We need the substance of democracy, not just the form. We cannot build durable societies with the threat of terrorism, banditry and insurgency growing in our countries and regions. Indeed, violent extremism remains an existential threat to both national and international peace and security and development. We are making concerted efforts to contain and roll back that threat. The high-level African counter-terrorism meeting hosted by Nigeria in April 2024 and its outcome, the Abuja declaration, promise to provide solutions to the challenges presented by terrorists and insurgents.
Climate change is a driver of insecurity, which also poses a veritable challenge to sustainable development. A few weeks ago, large areas of my country were inundated by seasonal flood waters, including one of our largest cities, Maiduguri, in the north-east. Other parts of Nigeria also experienced similar tragedies, occasioning the loss of lives and property. We need not remind ourselves to remain faithful to the implementation of the commitments that we all made voluntarily at the various meetings of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Failure to do so is merely to postpone the inevitable. No country is immune from the effects of climate change. It is better that we cooperate and collaborate to meet this ever-increasing challenge, rather than remain in our shells, waiting for the inevitable to happen. A common challenge requires a common solution. Nigeria stands ready to meet its obligations in terms of mitigation and adaptation measures nationally and regionally, with the active participation of other countries and international partners.
Conflict resolution is the main reason that the United Nations exists. But the task of prevention becomes all the more difficult when conflict becomes normalized, when even the condemnation of violence and civilian casualties and calls for a ceasefire are somehow regarded as controversial. As we emphasized at the Abuja high-level ministerial meeting, we must renew our focus on conflict prevention. Indeed, addressing the root causes of conflicts is often the first step towards providing long-term solutions. Clearly, some of the root causes of conflicts are social in nature, including poverty, hunger, ignorance, inequality and exclusion, as well as other forms of injustice. In the Sudan, other parts of our continent and further afield, foreign actors are exacerbating those tensions to prolong conflict and deepen the suffering of innocent people.
Today we are all witnesses to the heart-wrenching situation in Gaza and other Palestinian territories. We cannot discuss war and peace, conflicts and their resolution, or humanitarian imperatives today without reflecting on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has been raging since 7 October 2023. Of course, the conflict predates that period and has been simmering for the better part of half a century. What that tells us is that the international community has failed to live up to the spirit and aspirations of the United Nations to rid the world of inequality and violence and the domination of one people by another. Justice is antithetical to revenge. Freedom is an inalienable right and a natural entitlement that cannot be denied to any people. The Palestinian people deserve their independence. They deserve to have a home of their own on territories already recognized by the Assembly itself and international law, which is being routinely ignored. Nigeria continues to urge efforts to bring back on track the two-State solution, which offers the prospect for a new beginning for the region.
Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to supporting United Nations peacekeeping operations. We recognize the need for Africa to build strong and professional armies to meet the multiple challenges we face. Consequently, we reiterate the call for international support to operationalize the African Standby Force, in addition to the provision of requisite support and resources to ensure the upgrade, take-off and effectiveness of a centre of excellence on issues of counter-terrorism in Africa.
The reform of the Security Council is critical if the United Nations is to strengthen its relevance and credibility in our rapidly changing world. Some permanent members of Security Council have offered encouraging, if tentative, indications of support on the issue of the reform of the Council. We welcome the change in tone and urge an acceleration in momentum to the process. The Security Council should be expanded in the permanent and non-permanent member categories to reflect the diversity and plurality of the world. We fully support the efforts of Secretary-General Guterres in that regard. Africa must be accorded the respect that it deserves in the Security Council. Our continent deserves a place in the permanent members category of the Security Council, with the same rights and responsibilities as other permanent members.
The assumption of Mr. Yang’s stewardship of the General Assembly presupposes that he will be seized of the progress of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We note that most developing countries are lagging significantly behind in the achievement of the Goals, largely owing to a lack of resources available to finance their implementation and the burden of unsustainable external debt. It is our expectation that the adoption of the Pact for the Future will change the narrative, reposition economies and be translated into concrete measures that provide solutions to the challenges faced by developing and least developed countries. That is particularly significant in our region and in the Sahel, where human development indices are low and depressing.
It is for that reason that we reiterate the call by countries — especially those of the global South — for reform of the international financial architecture and the promotion of a rules-based, non-discriminatory, open, fair, inclusive, equitable and transparent multilateral trading system. We are aware of the debilitating impacts of corruption on global prosperity and national progress. The proceeds of corruption and illicit financial flows constitute a huge chunk of resources needed for sustainable development. The recovery and return of such funds to their States of origin is a fundamental principle of the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Therefore, the international community must promote practical measures to strengthen international cooperation to recover and return stolen assets and to eradicate safe havens that facilitate illicit flows of funds from developing countries to developed economies.
There is also an urgent need to promote fair and inclusive tax regimes in the world. Nigeria helped to introduce the resolution entitled “Promotion of inclusive and effective international tax cooperation at the United Nations” (resolution 78/230). We acknowledge the progress made in the adoption of the terms of reference of a United Nations framework convention on international tax cooperation. We should deepen that initiative and work towards such a convention. Similarly, we must ensure that any reform of the international financial system includes comprehensive debt relief measures to enable sustainable financing for development. Countries of the global South cannot make meaningful economic progress without special concessions and a review of their current debt burden.
My Administration pays due regard to the imperative of creating a national environment conducive to investment and ease in doing business. Last year, President Bola Ahmed Tinubu signed four executive orders to curb double taxation. The Government also established a presidential task force for a review of fiscal policy and tax reform. Those measures are geared towards not only boosting investor confidence in Nigeria but also ensuring that investors make reasonable profit from their investments.
While the world is transitioning into the fourth industrial revolution, Africa remains energy deficient. The push for the accelerated implementation of SDG 7 for affordable and clean energy must therefore take into account Africa’s precarious situation. Nigeria believes that natural gas remains central to the search for solutions to the energy challenges that Africa and the international community face. Access to affordable, reliable and cleaner sources of energy is more than an environmental or development issue — it is a key factor in social peace and international security.
Nigeria remains unwavering in its commitment to SDG 13 on climate action, including the net zero ambition and the transition from fossil fuel energy to clean energy. As a demonstration of that commitment, the Government established a presidential committee on climate action and green economy solutions and appointed a special presidential envoy on climate action. We will redouble our efforts to address the challenges posed by climate change, including the urgent need to transition away from fossil fuel energy.
Yet such commitments must be juxtaposed with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and the relevant provisions of the Paris Agreement on climate change of 2015. The Paris Agreement provided for developed countries to take the lead in the quest to achieve net zero and to offer support, including financing, to developing countries for the actualization of the climate change Goal. Worthy of note is the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage for vulnerable countries, secured at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Egypt and expanded at COP 28 in the United Arab Emirates. It is our expectation that, during this year’s seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly and at the upcoming COP 29, to be held in Azerbaijan in November, we will go a step further by providing developing countries — especially African countries — with access to the loss and damage fund, including the $100 billion pledged by developed countries to mitigate the negative impacts of climate change.
In this age of digital innovation, we must address the emerging divide between the global South and the global North. With the evolution of artificial intelligence, that divide risks becoming wider still. The United Nations should work towards eliminating barriers to the digital economy in Africa, such as the high costs of Internet services and intellectual property rights. Furthermore, there is a need to work towards common global standards to regulate cryptocurrency trading platforms. That is the most effective way to provide confidence in those new markets and limit the potential for instability. Our own experience in Nigeria, as in other countries, shows that new technologies, when not properly regulated, can facilitate organized crime, violent extremism and human trafficking. In our own case, the trading of cryptocurrency helped to fuel speculation and undermined macroeconomic reforms.
Separately, we have also witnessed — in rich and poor countries alike — the corrosive impact of unfiltered hate speech and fake news across social media. There is much more that we could and should do, together, to strengthen those guard rails that will help release the most progressive elements of the new technologies shaping our world and curb those more destructive tendencies.
We are particularly mindful of the imperatives of achieving the advancement of youth and women as a factor in national development and peace and security. Nigeria has developed its own national action plan on women and peace and security, as well as a national action plan on youth and peace and security, to ensure the participation of both women and youth in the peace and security sector. The Summit of the Future cannot be deemed successful without setting clear, ambitious and achievable development goals to address the various challenges facing our youth. In line with that aspiration, the Nigerian Government will continue to invest in Nigerian youth through initiatives like the revitalization of the national youth investment fund for 2024, focused on youth empowerment and entrepreneurship.
As much as the global family still grapples with the crippling consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the greatest lesson that we have learned is never again to treat any health situation with levity. In line with SDG 3, we must continue to work together to ensure the good health and well-being of all. There is no disease that should be relegated to the background owing to some perceived classification of its seriousness or importance.
Migration is a complex and polarizing issue that affects rich and poor countries alike. Nigeria is a country of origin, transit and destination. We are a major stakeholder in the global migration dynamic and understand the challenges and benefits it brings. Accordingly, I wish to reiterate our support for the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. The Global Compact, which we should all continue to support, represents our collective efforts to provide major safeguards for the treatment of migrants.
I will conclude by reaffirming Nigeria’s steadfast commitment to the deepening of multilateralism, just as we did 65 years ago from this rostrum, when we joined the United Nations as the 99th Member State. We remain committed to that desire “to remain on friendly terms with all nations and to participate actively in the work of the United Nations Organization” (A/PV.893, p. 535), as expressed by our founding Prime Minister, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa.
It is my hope that our deliberations this year will result in solutions that will address our collective challenges and accelerate the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals and the advancement of peace and human dignity for the sake of present and future generations.
