After hearing so many analyses, the description of so many misfortunes and calamities, and the details of the holocausts that afflict us as a human family, and after seeing and observing the brilliance of so much intelligence, we are left with silence and emptiness because, in the midst of all that we know or that we believe we know we do not find or perceive common answers to the weaknesses and pains of our societies, the abuses and aberrations, the aggressions of Powers and the unjust world order that, in all aspects, rather seems to be suffocating us more and more, despite our knowledge, experience and the spirit that as human beings we must nourish to better enlighten ourselves.
The catastrophes of injustice, the pretensions to supremacy and the perverse appetites of domination, submission and barbarism, as in the most terrible times of what was called colonization or conquest, seem to be getting worse, perpetuating the slavery of humankind to the most ignoble feelings, to greed and avarice and to the dominion of some people over others, flouting the principles and values of equality and rights that humankind and intelligence believed to have established at the cost of great suffering.
Cataclysm after cataclysm, we are extending war as a savage method of imperialism and capitalism — itself savage, barbaric and fierce — walking towards the extinction of all living beings and refusing to accept that only peace can win out. Because peace is justice; it is harmonious coexistence, respectful cooperation and the march of freedom, dignity and the sovereignty of peoples, which assures us all of better times in history.
But peace would seem today to be one of the most ardent fantasies and dreams. We do not walk the paths of peace and of course we have no understanding of the just and lasting peace that can be seen as the path towards a world of brotherhood, joy and solidarity. Every morning we wake up, in so many parts of our planet, to the dead and more dead, sacrificed on the bonfires of the insipid superiority of some; dead and more dead that weigh or should weigh on the conscience of the warmongers, merchants and traffickers of apocalyptic wars imposed by those who, with blood and fire, destroy beings, cultures and lands, enslave, crucify and exploit life to their liking, whim and convenience.
In that daily massacre, how many us find ourselves to be the losers, particularly in the sphere of the most human and profound feelings and emotions — love, brotherhood and the hope that human beings seem to be abandoning. Those values are undoubtedly victims of the hell that is sold to us as paradise and of their satanic majesties who, unaware of the tragedies they impose, forget the elementary and basic principle of civilization, which should be the empowerment of all for the good of all.
We lose our soul every day, not because we sell it to the devil or devils, but because our generations should have learned so much from the millions of human beings who have been sacrificed throughout history on the bonfires of vanities, ambitions, fatal selfishness and failures not internalized. The enemies of peace claim and seem to be succeeding in turning us into the most arid of deserts in terms of that spirituality that we do not see or understand and of the strengths of human consciousness that we do not apply.
Among all the aggressions, barbarities, attacks and crimes; among all the satanic, infernal attacks; among all the evidence of evil defeating good, we, the people who know how to fight, have our culture and spiritual experience of national dignity and decorum. That is our greatness. That is our most precious heritage. That is the kingdom of God on Earth. That is the beginning, the dawn of a new world that is being born amidst anguish, suffering and pain, forced and imposed upon us by those sick minds that do not see and do not want to see that other world and try to continue inhabiting — for their own benefit and with millennial backwardness — the old and blood-soaked world.
So much pain, so many battles, so many chains and so much slavery go into forging the steel of our human condition, which rises from truth to truth, from awakening to awakening, from courage to courage and from boldness to boldness, each day accumulating, paradoxically, more glory and more victories of the genuine truth and the human spirit that we must all make prevail. No one can take from us the certainty of a new world. No one can take from us the reality of a fraternal world of understanding, solidarity and respectful cooperation in the present and for the future of all.
In the old world designed by the conquistadors, they will be frustrated, sad and alone, condemned and repudiated by those of us who have learned to revere love, to banish the grotesque impositions of hatred, to bury the humiliations, degradations and indignities and, above all, to ignore the terror and fear with which the damned of the Earth incite and seek to intimidate us.
We shall never fall to our knees. We shall never condescend to the enemies of peace and the common good. We shall never be slaves to selfishness or greed. We shall never turn a blind eye to the atrocity that some turn into a rule of life or to the false narrative of the hypocrites who with artificial techniques and tactics and technicolor celluloid want to sell us and install in us a childish, fictional, blind, deaf, dumb and paralytic world, exonerating those guilty of so many crimes against humanity.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the genocide that the Government of Israel and its allies in the first world have committed, are committing and continue to commit against the glorious Palestinian people, against the brave people of Lebanon and against so many other brave, courageous and dignified peoples who do not submit to brutality.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the aggressions against Syria, Iran and many other great and fighting brothers on all continents.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the occupation and usurpation of the rights of peoples and countries, such as Haiti.
We will not be silent now or in the future. We denounce and condemn the systematic policy of extermination of cultures and rights that the colonial and imperialist Powers maintain against peoples, Governments and countries, including Cuba, Venezuela, Bolivia and Nicaragua, which have joined the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) in a strategic unity of defence of our sovereignties, independence and legitimate paths and our own models of institutionality, empowerment and the participatory and direct democracy we exercise.
We are in solidarity with all the countries and peoples affected by the bestiality and brutality that has been unleashed against our Mother Earth and our resources, generating what is known today as climate change, which is nothing but selfishness and the plundering of our planetary resources; which have degenerated into a profusion of disasters of all kinds; which are not natural; which demand climate justice; and which have been and are imposed by the greedy enslavers, obstructionists and plunderers of this world, without consideration or compensation, reparation or compensation, against those who have the most to lose. We unite in brotherhood, solidarity and complementarity in the just struggles for food security, health security, security in education, security of rights, human security — rights that we will never renounce.
We join, of course, in the urgent and daily struggle against terrorism in all its forms, against drug trafficking and organized crime, against the vices and criminal activities that have been imposed on us to weaken our institutions, models and practices, and to strengthen interference through policies and modalities that invade us and encourage the installation of forms and ways of life that are foreign to us, further generating an image of pitiful incapacity or beggary, which we do not accept in any way.
To the invaders and interventionists in sheep’s clothing — sheep’s skin and wolves’ mouths — we say: We are peoples rich in culture, resources, community models and values that have been and are disfigured, defamed and plundered. We will not allow them to turn us into needy supplicants, because we are not. Despite their facade of false kindness and generosity, their interests are evident and their interference in our own affairs is not only unacceptable, but denounceable and inappropriate.
We have the right to all our freedoms and to the supreme dignity of the spirit and culture, of consciousness and conviction, of learning and the consistent, permanent and humble pilgrimage that inspires us to learn from everyone, to incorporate all that is good and to discard and repudiate everything that seeks to turn us into servile conglomerates, divided by the strategies of the imperialists of the Earth. We defend our supreme dreams alongside Bolívar, Martí, Sandino, Morazán and so many great beings who preceded us and anticipated the duty to fight, fight, fight and to win, win, win.
Nothing is free in this world. We must grow in consciousness and heart every day, absolutely lucid, absolutely clear and absolutely convinced and consistent, because only the union of the peoples of the planet will make the imperialists of the Earth give up. Only that union will make them retreat, even if they continue plotting their crimes. We will find them, wrangle them, expose them, confront them and defeat them.
In the fighting and victorious ALBA, we are one with Chávez, Nicolás and their great people at all times. We are one with the Cuba of Fidel, Raúl and Miguel and their dignified and formidable resistance. We are one with Bolivia and its respectable paths. We are one with Honduras and its challenges. We are one with all of Mesoamerica and the challenges we face. We are one with Asia, with the Arab peoples and with the peoples of Africa who also live among us.
We are one with the Russian Federation in its great battles against bestial fascism — battles that we shall surely all win.
We are one with the People’s Republic of China, which teaches us so much and shares with us its magnificent and great experience of building the well-being of its people and of solidarity with the entire world for a community of the future.
We are one with all the fighters and warriors of the world and with the powers of firmness and dignity that we have always possessed. Today, more awake than ever, we do not allow ourselves to be crucified. On the contrary, we raise with pride and joy our flags and banners because we know that humanity and the human spirit must win. We will win and we will prevail. Only in that way can we preserve and increase the highest ideals and values of that humankind to which we all belong.
From our Nicaragua, blessed, dignified, always sovereign, Christian, socialist and solidary, we embrace all throughout the world who seek peace, love, respect, rights and well-being. United forever with them all, we move forward to the eternal beyond of our victorious General Augusto Sandino and the immortal poetry of our great Rubén Darío and his “Song of Hope”:
“A great flight of crows stains the celestial blue.
A thousand-year-old breath brings threats of plague.
Men are murdered in the East End.
“Has the apocalyptic Antichrist been born?
Omens have been known and wonders have been seen and the return of Christ seems imminent.
“The earth is pregnant with pain so deep that the imperial dreamer, brooding, suffer with the anguish of the heart of the world.
“Executioners of ideals afflicted the earth:
in a well of shadow humanity locks itself with the rude Molossians of hatred and war.
“O Lord Jesus Christ! Why are you late, what are you waiting for to extend your hand of light over the beasts and make your divine flags shine in the sun?
“Suddenly arises and pours the essence of life about so many crazy, sad or hardened souls that, lover of darkness, your sweet dawn forgets.
“Come, Lord, to make glory of yourself.
Come with tremor of stars and horror of cataclysm, come to bring love and peace over the abyss.
“And your white horse, which the visionary looked at, happens. And sound the divine extraordinary bugle.
My heart will be the ember of your censer.”
Today we remember the Nicaraguan father, priest, chancellor of the dignity and decorum of our peoples, Miguel d´Escoto Brockmann, who fought for and bequeathed to us the responsibility of battling for the refoundation of the United Nations so that it might promote debate and the combat for justice, the right to harmony and the happiness of peoples — the United Nations as an instrument of the nations to denounce, condemn, reject and repudiate all the abominations and aberrations that are committed against all of us; to encourage the good and affection; and to banish evil, disgrace and hatred in our relations, which must be marked by brotherly coexistence.
May the peoples of the world arise. The Earth must be the paradise of all humankind. The world will be different and better. That is what we are working for. That is what unites us. That is what we believe in. I convey the affectionate greetings of the people of Nicaragua, of the President, Commander Daniel Ortega, and Vice-President Rosario Murillo.
