I stand here as a humble representative of 30 million proud Nepali people. At the very outset, allow me to extend my sincere congratulations to the President of the General Assembly and the members of the Bureau on their well-deserved elections. I would also like to reaffirm Nepal’s full support as they undertake the important responsibilities entrusted to them. We extend our deepest appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis, the outgoing President, for his commendable leadership in successfully guiding the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. Our highest accolades go to the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his tireless dedication to reinforcing multilateralism in tackling global challenges. I fondly recall his visit to Nepal last year, his message of peace from the sacred birthplace of Gautam Buddha and his message about climate catastrophe from the mountains of the Everest region.
The world is at a watershed moment in history. The contrasts between rich and poor, harmony and hatred, and economic development and environmental destruction have never been as stark as they are today. Both people and planet stand on the brink of climate catastrophe. Geopolitical rivalries are resurging. Military expenditures are skyrocketing, along with an unabated arms race. The spectre of nuclear conflict looms larger than ever before. On the one hand, our economy remains frail, still grappling with the lingering effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic. On the other hand, nationalism and protectionism have re-emerged, even before we have reaped the benefits that liberalization and globalization were meant to deliver. Even after 300 years on the journey to industrialization and modernization, it is deeply troubling that in our so-called civilized world of the twenty-first century, wealth and prosperity are concentrated mostly in the hands of the global North, and poverty and destitution are heavily concentrated in the global South, particularly in the least developed countries.
To overcome those travesties, we must demonstrate that our leadership promotes meaningful cooperation and collaboration. It is only through collective will and unified action that we can turn the tide and usher in an era of enduring peace and shared prosperity for all. In that context, the theme of this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, could not be more timely or relevant. We have reaffirmed our commitment through the Summit of the Future to build a safe, just and sustainable world for both present and future generations. That pledge is embodied in the three pivotal documents that we have adopted: the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), the Declaration on Future Generations and the Global Digital Compact. We must demonstrate our determination to implement those documents for the well-being of present and future generations.
Allow me to underline that the principle of leaving no one behind has long been the cornerstone of Nepal’s approach to development across all sectors. That philosophy is enshrined in our Constitution, which upholds the values of democracy by guaranteeing inclusivity, equality, justice, proportional representation, human rights and social protection for the most vulnerable sectors of society. I am determined to lead my country, guided by my deep commitment to comprehensive democracy. In my view, comprehensive democracy ensures equal rights, equal opportunities, social justice, the protection of vulnerable communities and security and dignity for all individuals. Democracy goes far beyond the right of the people to choose their leaders. It is about leading the people towards prosperity and happiness so that they can enjoy the utmost dignity. At the international level, sovereign equality and mutual respect constitute the bedrock of comprehensive democracy. Those principles are essential for building the frameworks for a just, inclusive, equitable, representative and accountable global order.
As a nation emerging from conflict, Nepal deeply understands the profound value of peace and political stability. Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2006, Nepal has been firmly focused on completing the peace process at the earliest opportunity. Immediately after the formation of my Government, Parliament passed a transitional justice bill to settle transitional justice issues once and for all. In implementing the law, we will uphold victims’ rights, including the right to truth and justice. We will also use reparations and reconciliation to heal the wounds and scars of the conflict period. We appreciate the support of the international community, including the United Nations system, in that regard. The present Government, formed from a coalition of our two major political parties, is determined to secure stability, while driving economic transformation so as to bring inclusive and equitable prosperity to our people. At this juncture, stability and economic transformation are paramount to us — more so than our periodic competition in elections. We have dedicated ourselves to realizing our national aspiration: “Prosperous Nepal, happy Nepali”.
Nepal will graduate from its status of least developed country by 2026. We are diligently working towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, and we aspire to become a developed country by 2043, despite facing significant economic headwinds. Our path to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, however, remains fraught with difficulties. We are confronted with a substantial financial gap of approximately $24 billion, which needs to be bridged to fulfil the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Against that backdrop, Nepal hosted the International Development Association 21 replenishment meeting held in June, underscoring the crucial need for continued and enhanced support from the International Development Association and that of other development partners. In that pursuit, we strongly reiterate our call for enhanced, predictable and sustained international support.
Climate change has emerged as the gravest threat to our planet, people and prosperity. My own country, Nepal, is particularly hard hit. We stand as one of the nations most vulnerable to climate change and are ranked as the twentieth most disaster-prone country in the world. Of utmost concern is the alarming rate at which the pristine Himalayas, often referred to as the “third pole”, are losing their vast snow reserves. That loss threatens water availability for billions of people living downstream, extending far beyond the borders of my country.
Nepal has been making a huge contribution to the health of our planet through its forests, mountains and rivers. Yet, despite those efforts, we continue to bear the brunt of climate change. In that context, we call for climate justice. Our mountains play a crucial role in regulating the climate and ecosystem of oceans, with their snow-fed rivers flowing down to the oceans. Nepal’s Himalayas, as a natural climate stabilizer, help to maintain a cooling system in a region situated in the hottest zone of the planet, between the tropic of Cancer and the tropic of Capricorn. Given their significance, it is essential that the mountain agenda receive due attention in climate negotiations. Nepal is steadfast in its commitment to the Paris Agreement and seeks to achieve the target of net zero by 2045, five years earlier than the global target. As climate change is a global challenge, it demands global action and collaborative efforts to address its widespread and cascading impacts. Adequate climate financing, including the Loss and Damage Fund, is crucial to supporting climate-resilience measures and infrastructure for adaptation in developing countries, in particular in least-developed countries.
The land of Nepal is blessed with the wisdom of enlightened great sages from both the Hindu and the Buddhist faiths, in particular the teachings of Gautam Buddha. That profound legacy has shaped our worldview, leading us to seek global harmony, peace and security. The values of love, harmony, tolerance and empathy, as espoused by Gautam Buddha, hold even greater relevance today than they did more than 2,500 years ago. But, to our deep dismay, the world is increasingly distressed by division, suspicion, hatred and enmity.
Nepal firmly believes that dialogue and diplomacy are the sole means of resolving conflicts, including in Ukraine and the Middle East. It is through love and compassion that hostility and hatred can be overcome, paving the way for lasting peace. On the issue of the Israel-Palestine conflict, we continue to support a two-State solution, whereby Israel and Palestine coexist peacefully and securely within internationally recognized borders, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. We must address the worsening humanitarian crises in regions such as Libya, Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan, Yemen and elsewhere. It is vital to uphold the principles of sovereign equality and non-interference, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure peace and stability. Consequently, we staunchly oppose any form of unilateral intervention or sanctions.
Disarmament and non-proliferation issues must be prioritized. Nepal strongly advocates for general and complete disarmament of all weapons of mass destruction. As the host country of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, Nepal firmly believes that regional efforts, including the Kathmandu process, serve to strengthen the global disarmament regime.
Technology presents a double-edged sword, especially for the least developed countries. If we harness it, we can make remarkable progress. If we fail, it will leave us further behind. We call for technology transfer to enable us to catch up.
Nepal has always adhered to a peaceful, independent, balanced and non-aligned foreign policy, on the basis of the principles of Panchsheel, the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the norms of world peace. We conduct our foreign policy with profound belief in “amity with all, enmity with none”. Nepal remains committed to further strengthening its close, cordial and constructive relations with its immediate neighbours and beyond, rooted in the principles of mutual respect, sovereign equality, territorial integrity, non-interference in each other’s internal affairs and peaceful coexistence.
As the largest contributor of troops and police to United Nations peace operations, Nepal stands ready to further enhance its contribution to global peace and security. Nepal believes it is justified for us to call for commensurate representation in leadership positions, both at United Nations Headquarters and in the field, reflecting our significant contribution.
Nepal firmly advocates for the reform of the United Nations system to make it more effective, democratic, transparent and accountable. We firmly believe that stronger multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core, is the only path forward to tackle the numerous global crises we face. We echo a call for substantial reform of the global financial system, aptly described by the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, as morally bankrupt. The voice and representation of countries in special situations, including the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, must be ensured.
Nepal firmly upholds the belief that all human rights are universal, inalienable, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated. It is with that conviction that we have become a party to 24 international human-rights-related conventions and protocols, including seven of the nine core instruments. We are fully committed to promoting gender equality and ensuring equal rights for women. Nepal is making the necessary legal arrangements for the full realization of all human rights for women and girls, including their sexual and reproductive health rights. The protection of the rights of migrant workers, including their safety, security, dignity and well-being, has always remained our priority. We strongly advocate for safe, orderly and regular migration to ensure that the benefits of migration are shared by all.
Finally, the world we inhabit is far from being perfect. Yet it is not all doom and gloom. We firmly believe that humankind is still capable enough to march ahead without compromising the prosperity and happiness of future generations. None of the global challenges we are facing today have been imposed by aliens. These are of our own making, our own creations. Therefore, it is self-evident that by fostering global understanding, trust and cooperation, we can overcome these problems and challenges. A just, inclusive and equitable world order and sustained prosperity are attainable when we collaborate effectively.
Let me reiterate the wisdom of our ancient text, the Maha Upanishad, from approximately the sixth century B.C.: Vasudhaiva kutumbakam, meaning “the whole world is one family”. We not only hold this philosophy dearly but also act on it in our everyday life. With this constant conviction, Nepal is committed to playing its role to secure our shared aspiration of enduring peace, progress and prosperity, while leaving no one behind.
