As President of the Republic of Nauru, a small island nation with a vision for a more equitable and sustainable future, I bring the Assembly warm greetings from the Government and the people of Nauru.
At this seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly, we gather at a time of unprecedented global challenge and opportunity. As we navigate the complexities of the twenty-first century, Nauru remains committed to the principles of sovereignty, self-determination and international cooperation that have guided our collective progress since the United Nations was founded.
As a nation surrounded by the ocean, Nauru has a vested interest in the responsible stewardship of the ocean’s marine resources. We have been at the forefront of international efforts to protect and sustainably use those resources, including developing and adopting the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction and exploring the wealth of the deep seabed’s mineral resources in line with our objectives under the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent.
The greatest risk we face is not the potential environmental impact of mineral recovery but the risk of inaction. There is a risk of failing to seize the opportunity to transform to renewable energy and decarbonize our planet. We cannot let fear and misinformation hold us back. We must rather use the knowledge that we have gathered wisely in order to ensure that deep-sea mineral recovery, under the principle of the common heritage of humankind, does not compromise the integrity of our marine environment. This is not just an economic opportunity but an environmental imperative. We therefore call on the international community not to ignore the science and the progress we have made. Instead, we urge Members and the International Seabed Authority Council to work with us to establish and adopt the robust regulations necessary for the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources. We have the science, the technology and the imperative. Let us rise to the challenge and opportunity before us, employing our advancements for the good of all, and let the time for action be now.
Nauru’s story is one not of despair but resilience. Our people have thrived for centuries, living in harmony with the land and the sea. Today, we adapt, innovate and persevere. We are exploring new frontiers because even as we fight the effects of climate change we must also adapt to the reality that is upon us. Through initiatives like the Higher Ground Initiative project, we are reclaiming land, strengthening our infrastructure and securing our future. Adaptation initiatives to address modern challenges and concerns demand more than technical expertise. They require substantial financial resources, which is an ongoing struggle. When it comes to climate finance, we are too often relegated to the back of the queue.
We must also address the critical issue of access to basic financial services. For nations such as Nauru, equitable access to banking is not merely a convenience, it is a lifeline. Yet we face the growing threats of de-risking and the loss of correspondent banking relationships. That challenge transcends financial concerns and strikes at the heart of our sovereignty and dignity. Our nation’s struggles cannot be measured by income alone. We are vulnerable in myriad ways, and the global financial system must evolve to reflect that complex reality. We are encouraged by the Assembly’s recent adoption of the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (resolution 78/322), and we further call on the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, international financial institutions and multilateral development banks to integrate the Index into their frameworks. It is not just another statistic. It is a tool that provides a more accurate picture of our national circumstances, including our strengths, challenges and potential.
One of the most pressing issues of our time is the rising tensions between global Powers. Nauru has long believed in the importance of maintaining good relations with all nations, great and small. We are friends to all and enemies to none, guided by our motto of “God’s will first”. Our restored diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China are a testament to the fact that even the largest and smallest of countries can find common ground and work for their mutual benefit. Nauru is proud of its strong and growing relationship with China, and I want to take this opportunity to commend China’s recent agreement with Japan on the ocean discharge of Fukushima nuclear-contaminated water. That historic accord represents a significant step towards addressing a pressing issue of global concern.
As a staunch friend of Cuba, we continue to call for an immediate and unconditional end to the decades-long embargo imposed on it. As we know, conflicts and tensions persist across many regions of the world. In our shared pursuit of progress and prosperity, it is crucial to acknowledge that conflict impedes growth and undermines community stability. We must therefore intensify our efforts to foster peace and development free from the shadow of conflict. Let us reaffirm our commitment to building bridges of understanding, nurturing empathy and promoting reconciliation. We must understand that peace and development are not separate entities but intertwined pillars of human progress. Peace creates an environment in which individuals can thrive, communities flourish and nations prosper. In the absence of conflict, societies can better allocate resources to education, healthcare, infrastructure and sustainable economic growth, fostering the advancement of all. Let us work together for a future in which everyone can live in dignity, harmony and opportunity, leaving behind a legacy of peace for generations. By prioritizing conflict resolution, we pave the way for resilience, progress and shared prosperity. We must focus on building bridges — not walls — and work for a more integrated, connected world. Inclusivity and engagement are vital as we strive for full economic and financial participation, ensuring that no country — large or small, and regardless of its development status — is left behind. That is a call for collective action that we must all heed for the sake of our shared future.
Reform of the Security Council, which is long overdue, must reflect the geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century. It is evident that the current structure of the Council has been a subject of debate, with legitimate concerns about representation, effectiveness and the ability to address current security issues. The imperative for peaceful resolutions and pursuing lasting peace in conflict-affected regions further underscores the critical need for a reformed and strengthened Council. Let us be the leaders who bring about a new era of peace and reconciliation.
In our fight against climate change, we continue to call on the Secretary-General to appoint a special representative on climate and security. We are pleased to endorse the call for a fossil-fuel non-proliferation treaty, and we urge countries to back that initiative for a sustainable and equitable future. We also eagerly await an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on States’ obligations regarding climate change and will closely follow and support the implementation of the Court’s guidance in the pursuit of climate justice. Nauru is pleased to welcome the adoption of the ambitious Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), but we are disappointed about the removal of action 21, addressing the issue of security threats posed by the climate crisis. Alongside members of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security, my delegation advocated for the inclusion of that action with a view to addressing those threats, but its removal was a non-negotiable issue, despite our flexibility and willingness to compromise. We believe it is vital to stress the gravity of that decision. Now, before I conclude, I would like to make the following calls to action.
Let me say to the developed nations that they should recognize their historical responsibility for emissions and honour their obligations under the Paris Climate Agreement. They should provide the climate financing and technology transfer they have promised. And they should support our efforts to transition to renewable energy, enhance our climate resilience and protect our biodiversity.
Let me say to those who seek to block our efforts to find renewable energy resources that they should not dismiss the potential of deep-sea minerals outright. They should not ignore the science and the progress we have made. They should rather work with us to establish the robust regulations necessary for responsible mining. In line with the theme of this year’s session of the General Assembly, we must accelerate our efforts without delay because the climate crisis will not wait for us to get our act together.
Let me say to our fellow developing nations that we extend our hand to them in solidarity. Let us share knowledge, resources and solutions. Let us amplify our collective voice, for in unity there is strength.
Let me say to the United Nations that we call on it to fulfil its founding promise. It should be a bastion of multilateralism, a resolute champion of the vulnerable and a bold catalyst for the transformative change that our world so desperately needs.
I would like to conclude by reminding everyone that leaving no one behind is not a mere platitude but a moral imperative. It is a call to action and a reminder that our fates are intertwined and that the advancement of all hinges on the advancement of the least among us. That is the vision enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the promise of the Sustainable Development Goals. Nauru may be small in size, but its resolve is immense. We will continue to fight for our homeland and our future generations. Let us act together with urgency and ambition, and in the belief that a better world is possible. May God bless the Republic of Nauru and the United Nations.
