It gives me great pleasure to extend to Mr. Philemon Yang and his friendly country, the Republic of Cameroon, our sincere congratulations on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
We are also pleased to express our deep appreciation for the efforts made by his predecessor from friendly Trinidad and Tobago during his presidency of the previous session.
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to Secretary-General António Guterres for his tireless efforts in leading the United Nations and his unwavering resolve to uphold and implement international law in the pursuit of justice and peace, reflecting the vision of the United Nations of a world in which security, stability, peace and prosperity prevail for all. We affirm the Sultanate of Oman’s full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations in promoting international peace and security, and express our strong support for the Charter of the United Nations, recognizing the importance of the United Nations in embodying the hopes and aspirations of peoples for development and a dignified and prosperous life.
The foreign policy of the Sultanate of Oman is founded on a steadfast vision that embraces an approach of dialogue and tolerance in addressing all issues and challenges. It is a vision that seeks to achieve peace and build relations based on mutual respect, positive cooperation and harmony among nations.
The leadership, the Government and the people of the Sultanate of Oman believe in the use of legitimate and peaceful means to resolve issues and conflicts. Accordingly, my country calls for an immediate ceasefire and cessation of hostilities in the Gaza Strip, Lebanon and the Red Sea region. We emphasize the need to address the root causes of those conflicts by ending the illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories and achieving justice for the Palestinian people on the basis of the two-State solution and the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the 1967 borders. Oman stresses the need to grant Palestine full membership of the United Nations, end the genocide policies carried out by the Israeli occupation forces against the Palestinian people, and alleviate their humanitarian suffering.
We believe in the importance of stepping up efforts to contain escalation and tension and end the bloodshed by adhering to reasonable dialogue, the rules of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of international legitimacy, and by respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs, ensuring that all nations and peoples can live in peace, security and dignity.
The Sultanate of Oman is moving forward with its programmes in the field of social protection through a comprehensive system that supports various sectors of society, including women, children, the elderly and people with disabilities, as well as social insurance and job security programmes. That reflects the progress achieved by the Sultanate of Oman in the field of sustainable development and its continuous efforts to develop these programmes in line with the best international practices, while continuing to provide educational, health and social care to all members of society. My country also affirms its ongoing support for and empowerment of young people, whom we consider to be the pillar of the future and the axis of sustainable development. We believe that young people are the driving force for innovation, growth and progress. We are resolved to create opportunities that will enable them to apply their skills and contribute effectively to building a brighter future.
Oman stresses the importance of promoting respect and peaceful coexistence among peoples and calls for combating all forms of discrimination, racism, hatred and violence. Oman is also making great efforts to address the challenges of climate change, reduce emissions and stimulate investment in renewable energy projects. Our net-zero carbon strategy for 2050 is driven by clean energy projects, green hydrogen initiatives and nature-based solutions. That commitment arises from our belief in the importance of protecting the environment and preserving natural resources for future generations, while balancing economic development and environmental sustainability.
Oman’s efforts and development programmes are in line with its national vision, embodied in Oman Vision 2040, which is aimed at achieving the goals of economic and social development and facing future challenges. In that context, the Sultanate of Oman has submitted its second voluntary national report, which reflects its deep commitment to the global principles and objectives of sustainable development and highlights the progress made in various spheres of development. In that context, we welcome the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1). We commend collective international efforts leading to that achievement, which outline a road map for the world to enhance international cooperation and effectively address global challenges. We therefore urge all Member States to commit to implementing the Pact, its vision and goals through fruitful cooperation and knowledge exchange, and to adopt it as a path towards achieving a better, safer and more prosperous future for future generations.
We sincerely hope that this session will be successful.
