It is a matter of great honour for me to address the General Assembly for the second time as the Prime Minister of a country that has always been a proactive member of the United Nations family.
I would like to congratulate and wish you every success, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
I would also like to express my appreciation for the efforts of Ambassador Dennis Francis and his skilful stewardship of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
The Father of our nation, the Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah, declared in 1947 that “we stand by the United Nations Charter and will gladly make our full contribution to the peace and prosperity of the world”. Pakistan has stood unwaveringly by that commitment. Today, we are facing the most daunting challenges to the world order: Israel’s genocidal war in Gaza, a dangerous conflict in Ukraine, destructive conflicts across Africa and Asia, rising geopolitical tensions, resurging terrorism, galloping poverty, stifling debt and the mounting impact of climate change. We feel the chill of a new Cold War. In response to those challenges, our Secretary-General, António Guterres, called for the Summit of the Future. It led to the adoption of the 54 actions on development, peace and security, technology and global governance in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1).
Today, I stand before the General Assembly to express the searing pain and anguish of the people of Pakistan at the plight of the people of Gaza. Our hearts bleed as we witness the tragedy unfolding in the Holy Land, a tragedy that shakes the very conscience of humankind and the foundations of this institution. Can we as human beings remain silent while children lie buried under the rubble of their shattered homes? Can we turn a blind eye to the mothers cradling the lifeless bodies of their children? That is not just a conflict; it is a systematic slaughter of the innocent people of Palestine and an assault on the very essence of human life and dignity.
The blood of Gaza’s children stains the hands not just of the oppressors, but also of those who are complicit in prolonging that cruel conflict. When we ignore their endless suffering, we diminish our own humanity. It is not enough to condemn; we must act now and demand an immediate end to the bloodshed. We must remember that the blood and sacrifice of the innocent Palestinians will never go to waste. We must worry about their plight and difficulties and stand by them. We must work for a durable peace through the two-State solution. We must seek a viable, secure, contiguous and sovereign State of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its eternal capital. To advance those goals, Palestine must also be immediately admitted as a full Member of the United Nations.
In the span of a few days, Israel’s unrelenting bombing of Lebanon has killed over 500 people, including women and even small children. The failure to implement United Nations resolutions has emboldened Israel. It threatens to drag the entire Middle East into a war whose consequences could be grave and beyond imagination.
Like the people of Palestine, the people of Jammu and Kashmir, too, have struggled for a century for their freedom and right to self-determination. Instead of moving towards peace, India has resiled from its commitments to implementing the Security Council resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir. Those resolutions mandate a plebiscite to enable the people of Jammu and Kashmir to exercise their fundamental right to self-determination.
Since 5 August 2019, India has initiated unilateral illegal steps to impose what its leaders ominously call a “final solution” for Jammu and Kashmir. Day in and day out, 900,000 Indian troops terrorize the people of occupied Jammu and Kashmir with draconian measures, including prolonged curfews, extrajudicial killings and the abduction of thousands of young Kashmiris. At the same time, in a classic settler-colonial project, India is seizing Kashmiri lands and properties and settling outsiders in occupied Jammu and Kashmir in its nefarious design to transform the Muslim majority into a minority. That hackneyed tactic is employed by all occupying Powers, but it has always failed. In Jammu and Kashmir, too, it shall fail.
The Kashmiri people are resolute in their rejection of the false Indian identity that New Delhi seeks to impose upon them. Very severe conditions and atrocities are being imposed upon them every hour. India’s policy of brutal coercion and oppression in occupied Kashmir has ensured that Burhan Wani’s legacy continues to inspire the struggle and sacrifices of millions of Kashmiris. Inspired by the legitimacy of their epic struggle, they remain defiant. Their heart-wrenching stories remind us that behind every statistic lies a human life, a dream deferred and a hope shattered.
Even more worrisomely, India is engaged in a massive expansion of its military capabilities, which are essentially deployed against Pakistan. Its war doctrines envisage a surprise attack and a limited war under the nuclear overhang. Thoughtlessly, India has spurned Pakistan’s proposals for a mutual strategic restraint regime. Its leadership has often threatened to cross the Line of Control and take over Azad Kashmir.
Let me state in no uncertain terms that Pakistan will respond most decisively to any Indian aggression. Therefore, to secure a durable peace, India must reverse the unilateral and illegal measures it has taken since 5 August 2019 and enter into a dialogue for the peaceful resolution of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the wishes of the Kashmiri people. Let us remember that illegal occupation creates a fresh hell every day in the killing fields of Palestine and the pristine valleys of occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
Apart from conflicts, the twenty-first century has brought a cascade of crises, including the reversal of development and the mounting impact of climate change. Two years ago, my country was devastated by catastrophic floods, causing $30 billion in damage. It is now clear that each summer will bring blistering temperatures and trigger fresh climate impacts. Pakistan emits less than 1 per cent of carbon globally, yet we have paid a very heavy price through no fault of our own. That is most unfair in any calculus of global justice. We must uphold the axiom that the polluter must pay. Pakistan looks forward to the fulfilment of commitments made by our development partners to supporting the achievements of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and climate goals, including a new annual goal beyond $100 billion in climate finance.
With nearly 100 developing countries trapped in the vicious cycle of debt and liquidity crisis, which I always call a death trap rather than a debt trap, achieving the SDGs in those circumstances remains a distant mirage. The international financial architecture, which the Secretary-General has described as “morally bankrupt”, and the world trade and technology regimes must be reformed and aligned to promote development and global equity.
Since I assumed office in March, the progress and prosperity of my 240 million people have been my singular focus. We have taken some very difficult but necessary decisions that have rescued our economy from collapse, restored macroeconomic stability, controlled fiscal deficits and strengthened our reserves. As a result, inflation has come down to a single digit and the prospects for economic growth have revived.
I should like to explain that challenge and the way we are negotiating it by reciting a stanza from a poem that makes me very emboldened, brave, hard-working and ready to make untiring efforts. The stanza is a befitting example of hard work, facing challenges and paving the way for success stories.
When things go wrong, as they sometimes will, And the road you’re trudging seems all uphill, When the funds are low and the debts are high, And you want to smile, but you have to sigh, When care is pressing you down a bit, Rest if you must, but don’t you quit.
That is how we have learned to face and negotiate the most daunting challenges we have faced.
Situated at the crossroads of South and Central Asia and the Middle East, we have prioritized geoeconomics and regional connectivity to secure win-win outcomes for our people. The second phase of the landmark China-Pakistan Economic Corridor has been successfully launched. Through the apex Special Investment Facilitation Council, we are mobilizing investments in resilient infrastructure, renewable energy, minerals, sustainable agriculture and technology. That will herald a new era of development and modernization in my beloved country.
For two decades, Pakistan has fought terrorism boldly and most successfully, defeating terrorist groups within Pakistan. We have paid a heavy price. Some 80,000 of our brave soldiers and civilians have been martyred, including innocent school-going children. The gory memories of school carnage haunt us to this day. Our economy has suffered a loss of $150 billion. Unfortunately, today we are again confronted by a new surge of externally financed and sponsored terrorism, especially by the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan/Fitna al-Khawarij and its associates. Make no mistake, we are determined to eliminate that threat as well through our comprehensive national effort, which we call Azm-e-Istehkam, meaning “Resolve to promote Stability”. We will work collectively with the international community to combat all forms of terrorism and reform the global counter-terrorism architecture.
Pakistan seeks the earliest possible normalization of the situation in Afghanistan. We join the United Nations appeal for $3 billion in humanitarian assistance to the millions of suffering Afghan brothers and sisters. At the same time, we endorse and share the international expectation that the Afghan interim Government will respect human rights, including the rights of women and girls, and promote political inclusion. In particular, the interim Government must take effective action to neutralize all terrorist groups within Afghanistan, especially those responsible for cross-border terrorism against neighbouring countries. Those include the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan, the Al-Qaeda-affiliated Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan/Fitna al-Khawarij, the Majeed Brigade, the Balochistan Liberation Army and other terrorist groups that, unfortunately, have been seen on Afghan territory.
Another troubling global development is the escalation of Islamophobia, which is now manifested by frequent desecrations of the Holy Quran, attacks on mosques, the negative stereotyping of Muslims and acts of discrimination and violence against them. The most alarming manifestation of Islamophobia is the Hindu supremacist agenda in India. It aggressively seeks the subjugation of 200 million Muslims and the obliteration of India’s Islamic heritage. Pakistan and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation will work with the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to implement a plan of action to combat that scourge.
Pakistan seeks an immediate end to the tragic conflict in Ukraine and its peaceful resolution, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international agreements.
Pakistan has a long and proud history of solidarity, friendship and cooperation with the nations of Africa. We will continue to cooperate with them to counter terrorism and resolve regional conflicts, including through United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding in Africa.
Finally, as we leave the General Assembly Hall, we must carry with us a message for our people that the weak are not voiceless, that the oppressed should not lose hope, that poverty is not preordained and that the Almighty’s promise of justice and equality in our only terrestrial home must be respected.
