A little over two months ago, I assumed the presidency of the Republic of Panama. In the five years of my mandate, I will have to face great challenges on behalf of all Panamanians, many of which concern not only my country but the entire hemisphere.
Our privileged geographic position has made us the crossing and meeting point of the Americas. We had the first railroad joining the Atlantic and the Pacific on our continent, the first customs office on the continent and the first Spanish city in the province of Tierra Firme. Our canal and airport hub make us strategic partners of all countries in the world. Currently, our canal serves a total of 180 maritime routes that connect 1,920 ports in 170 countries, constituting a great added value for products from all over the world. Aware of our importance as a place of convergence, our doors have always been open to all nationalities who, on a level playing field, want to take advantage of the competitive advantages of being, as our coat of arms says, “Pro Mundi Beneficio”.
But today Panama faces an immense problem as a result of its strategic location. Illegal immigration through the Darién jungle has been used for some time now as a gateway by hundreds of thousands of migrants fleeing serious economic, political and social problems in search of the so-called American dream. I know that territory very well, because a little over a decade ago, when I was Minister of Security of Panama, I led the forces that recovered Darién from the narco-guerrillas.
Today, it is immensely painful to see the social drama represented by that improvised path, which is travelled by women, children and elderly people who begin their inhumane journey through rivers, jungles and inhospitable places at the mercy of any type of threat to their safety. That movement of people is led by criminal organizations based in neighbouring countries, which receive dirty money to profit from the needs and hopes of thousands of human beings. I fully understand the difficult decision to migrate to escape the misery and oppression that people experience in their place of origin. The vast majority of them want to live, develop and progress in the land where they were born.
I repeat, the causes are known, but we cannot address them alone. As a nation, we are already facing too many social and financial problems. We do not have the resources or material capacities to provide a solution to the migration crisis on our own. Illegal immigration through Panama is part of an immense global problem and it is here at the United Nations that it should occupy an important place on its agenda. We are proud to be a country connected to world trade, but we will not allow ourselves to be used for the transit of illegal immigrants with the corresponding social, human and environmental costs that it entails for our territory. Panama is paying a high environmental price today as a result of that illegal flow of people, causing severe damage to our biodiversity.
I would point out that there is a huge difference between analysing the problem from places like this, in the middle of Manhattan, and being a first-hand witness to the tragedy, as I have been. Seeing children who have been orphaned by the harshness of the journey through the jungle would touch the soul of the coldest analyst who studies those issues from the comfort of an office.
Those are not problems limited to Darién or, to give another example, the Mediterranean. It is a complex system of organized crime that profits from human misfortune. More than half a million illegal immigrants entered the Darién border in 2023, corresponding to 12 per cent of the total population of Panama. If the same thing happened in the United States, it would entail the entry of 40 million illegal immigrants in one year, that is, a number 20 times greater than it receives today. Another example is Italy, which also has a serious migration problem. Last year, nearly 150,000 people entered Italy illegally. If that figure were proportionate to the situation in Panama, it would be equivalent to the entry of some 7 million illegals into that European country. I ask representatives to see the magnitude of what is happening, because we feel that we do not have all the international support that is required to deal with a situation that is so distressing from a humanitarian point of view and so costly financially, so threatening to our security and so alarming because of the environmental devastation that is left behind.
It is precisely that environmental damage that I want to talk about now. Darién is one of the largest neotropical forests in the world. When half a million people pass through and leave tons of waste — some of which is highly polluting, such as batteries and plastics — that generates serious ecological consequences over the years. Also, and this is painful to say, decomposing bodies are left on the side of the road or in the rivers. Not everyone survives the terrible 20-day odyssey through the jungle. Panama has to deal with a problem that is not ours, but we do so, to the extent possible, with the resources we have. No one can imagine, much less would accept, 500,000 people leaving garbage without any planning or treatment in the Bavarian forest in Germany or in Yellowstone National Park here in the United States — half a million souls in an irregular situation passing through without documents or controls.
Perhaps the reason for the lack of global indignation over the devastation of our province of Darién, the great green lung of the region, is because it is in an inhospitable place on the border between Panama and Colombia. I understand that part of the responsibility for why it is happening resides with officials from previous administrations of our country, who did not have the resolve or the strength to put the issue on the world agenda. But that has changed. This President will denounce it and will use every international forum to demand a shared effort to stop the flow of illegal migration.
Panama is today the new border of the United States, because those who seek a better life in that country pass through Darién. Panama, which has always been on the side of peace and the progress of nations, today needs help and support from those countries that it has historically helped on that and other issues. We need concrete cooperation and hands-on efforts to prevent them from using our territory as the beginning of a dream that is often generated by criminal organizations linked to drug trafficking and human trafficking.
Political instability is one of the causes that generate mass migration. When a country is enduring a serious, prolonged institutional crisis, the immediate consequence is the desertion of its citizens. Venezuela is a concrete example. That is why I want to talk about our regional political situation, which, coincidentally, is the main thread of the migration crisis we are experiencing. The growing degradation of its institutional system has caused the exodus of almost 8 million Venezuelans, according to data from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That figure represents a true migration tragedy to which international organizations have not given a convincing and credible response over the years.
The latest events in Venezuela have further undermined the country’s besmirched institutionality. Let us be clear — claiming victory without showing the voting tallies is like seeking to win a trial without presenting evidence; seeking to win without showing the tallies is the same as losing and not accepting the results. In point of fact, the current regime has lost the support of its most fervent defenders in the region or, in the best of cases, enjoys the fragile support of silence. It is more than evident that the current regime will not give up power or recognize its defeat.
That is why I call on the relevant organizations to act vigorously against attitudes and behaviours that are manifestly anti-democratic. I want to be emphatic that this is not a matter of ideology or differences of thought; it is about strict obedience to the popular will, which is the mother of all wills. Panama is open to dialogue with other countries where the political and representative system that emanates from the national constitution of each territory is respected.
I bring up the subject of Venezuela because it is very difficult for me to talk about health and the environment when 8 million of our neighbours have been forced to leave their territory, fleeing the misery experienced by a country that should be an economic Power. What regional sustainable development can we hope for in the face of an endless political crisis that affects the entire continent? I do not intend to disguise my speech under a green veil of natural green when blood has been spilled by immigrants who risk their lives in our jungle seeking a dream of freedom or when they contaminate the Darién, leaving a trail of destruction and desolation that Panamanians must clean up, repair and pay for. If there is really concern for sustainable development, I ask Member States to put up a powerful defence and establish precise mechanisms to reverse the damage caused in the Darién. I am referring not only to the environmental damage, but also to its root causes, such as the self-proclaimed triumph of the current regime in Venezuela.
As a third point, I want to pursue my statement by referring to the unjust, discriminatory lists on which our country has been included — lists that place us alongside tyrannies that have committed the worst atrocities and countries that do not open their doors to the world, do not respect democracy or promote terrorism. We do not accept being inscribed on lists drawn up by the special interests of nations that fail to be competitive or attractive to their fellow citizens. Panama cannot and should not allow such an affront, much less after all the efforts we have made.
We have implemented significant reforms in our financial and legal system over the past few years in order to comply with international standards of transparency and the prevention of money-laundering and other organized crimes. But that has not been enough. Our nation has demonstrated its readiness to cooperate with international organizations and has signed many tax information exchange treaties with many countries. That, too, has been insufficient. As a consequence, the prescriptions imposed under the false promise of declassifying us have been catastrophic for our economy, and even so we have not managed to free ourselves from such reckless accusations.
Panama is not a tax haven or anything like it, unlike other jurisdictions related to many countries that promote such lists, which are analysed and assessed with a different yardstick than that used for my country. It is paradoxical, but the nations that approve the inclusion of Panama on those lists use our canal, participate in public tenders, profit from paid consultancies and lobby for their companies to obtain contracts in our country. This President has made the firm decision not to allow companies from countries that endorse and support those lists to participate in international tenders, nor will they have our vote in international organizations. While they point their finger at us, they have enjoyed many facilities and no restrictive measures. Their biased vision seeks to maintain an infamous stigma imposed on Panama, which is a responsible country in terms of financial compliance. I want the best for my beloved Panama. I became President not to please other countries, but to meet the demands of my country.
Speaking of lists, I want to inform the Assembly that Panama is one of very few carbon-negative countries in the world — that is, we eliminate more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere than we emit. But that dazzling environmental status has brought us no benefit. Protecting a large part of our territory entails greater challenges in achieving authentic development. Today, countries that have destroyed their biodiversity in order to develop impose on other developing countries the environmental protection that they did not exercise. That represents an asymmetry in terms of opportunities for progress. On the one hand, we must keep our forests in a primary state and, on the other, we are included on lists that complicate investment and truncate the development of a globally competitive financial system. Panama does not accept those rules of the game. I want to reiterate in this Hall the message I shared with the Panamanian nation when I assumed the position of President:
“Panama is a country that is a friend of good causes and we will not allow
any more unfair accusations that harm our economic capacity and our prestige and that undermine the image of our country.”
In conclusion, I want to express our pride as Panamanians in that, in January of next year, we will become a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the sixth time in history. That is the result of sustained work over time. It is due to the conduct of our country in the fight against terrorism, human trafficking and drug trafficking. Panama contributes to peace and harmony among all peoples.
All of that is contradictory to the lists I referred to earlier. I am sorry to insist, but it is unacceptable that a country that acts honourably and consistently in favour of freedom, peace and international security should be associated with those who do the opposite, placing us on arbitrary lists that do not correspond to reality. It is truly unacceptable. We will continue to fight in a peaceful and sustained manner to end that unnecessary and, above all, discriminatory harassment at the hands of countries that would never impose on their own territories the conditions they demand of us.
To conclude, I would like to affirm that we will continue to build a country at the service of humankind, protecting our biodiversity despite the adversities and defending democracy despite the concrete threats prevailing in our region today. Panama will continue to connect global trade, fight for freedom, integrate into the world and demand the respect that we give and deserve as a nation of integrity with a noble, hard-working people who fight every day to make this world a better place to live.
