I have the privilege of addressing the General Assembly and conveying the special and respectful greetings of the constitutional President of the Republic, Dina Ercilia Boluarte Zegarra, who would have liked to be here with everyone and to be able to address this great universal Assembly.
I am honoured to convey the voice of my compatriots — my fellow Peruvians who, through their daily efforts, aspire to live a dignified life and to bequeath a promising future to their children. Peru, like the rest of the world, has valiantly toiled to mitigate the detrimental effects of political instability and the economic crisis resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic, which have taken an inestimable toll on Peruvian society, in particular the most vulnerable sectors. That is why President Boluarte’s Government is working hard to recover our rate of economic growth, seeking to unblock stalled projects and attracting foreign investment to develop major infrastructure projects that can generate decent, quality employment, thereby making a direct contribution to national development. Today we can say that we are seeing the first results of those efforts and that Peru is back on the path to growth and stability.
We still have a long way to go. Peru and all the countries of the world face a series of shared challenges that we can only overcome through international cooperation and harmonization of our efforts. Peru therefore reiterates its attachment to multilateralism as the best tool that we have to create, by mutual agreement, the conditions required to achieve sustainable development.
Without a doubt, the first of those conditions is peace. We, the countries that founded this Organization at the end of the Second World War, did so in order to “save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”. Today’s reality shows us that we are failing to achieve that fundamental purpose. Peru condemns any use of force in international relations. Aggression and the acquisition of territory by force run counter to the Charter of the United Nations and international law and undermine the legitimacy and effectiveness of our collective security system. The paralysis of the Security Council regarding some conflicts and the application of biases and double standards in others reminds us of the need to reform that organ and to review the prerogatives of its permanent members, above all the right of veto, the use of which is sometimes politically motivated and not aimed at addressing humanitarian issues.
From the General Assembly, Peru will continue to carry out concrete action for peace. We will continue to support disarmament, arms control and nuclear non-proliferation regimes and initiatives. We will continue to support the total elimination of nuclear weapons and to reject their testing, use and any form of threat of use. While we hope that nuclear disarmament will be internationally verifiable, we call on the main nuclear States to renew their bilateral commitments to reduce their respective arsenals, such as the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. On the ground, Peru will continue to contribute to United Nations peace operations, as it has done since 1958, contributing more than 10,000 troops. Currently, more than 250 members of our armed forces and national police are deployed under the United Nations flag, carrying out their duties with professionalism, courage and dedication. We have also made available a rapid reaction force of 200 troops, which can be deployed immediately when and where the United Nations requires it. Peru recognizes the important role that women play in the peace and security agenda. It is therefore gratifying to announce that we have far exceeded the goals established in the uniformed gender parity strategy 2018–2028, and we will continue to increase the percentage of female Peruvian military personnel deployed in peace operations.
The second condition for development is a clean and healthy environment. Climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution are interconnected threats that compromise the survival of present and future generations. Peru’s high vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate change makes that a priority issue for our foreign policy. That is why, together with other countries, we have asked the International Court of Justice to rule on States’ international obligations regarding climate change. Last year, my country was affected by Cyclone Yaku and the El Niño phenomenon, which caused human losses and extensive material damage. In that regard, I would like to express my gratitude to the United Nations system for supporting my Government’s efforts to assist the affected population. As it is aware of the increased frequency and impact of those phenomena due to the climate crisis, the Government of President Boluarte Zegarra has promoted the adoption of a preventive approach to disaster risk management, in line with the Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for All initiative and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. Likewise, as it is aware of the need to develop a low-carbon economy and to promote a change in the energy matrix that favours clean and renewable energies, the Government of Peru has been updating the national climate change strategy in order to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.
However, those national efforts are not enough. We must increase international cooperation, always taking into account the principle of shared but differentiated responsibilities in climate action. Developed countries should adopt more ambitious emission reduction targets and honour their climate finance commitments, including mobilizing at least $100 billion annually for developing countries and implementing the loss and damage fund agreed at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. We must also urgently guarantee financing from the Green Climate Fund, which has allowed us to make progress in our adaptation and mitigation work.
Our main challenge is to guarantee development for our peoples, and we count on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to guide our work. Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s most recent report on progress towards achieving the SDGs (A/79/79) reveals that we are not on track. Peru is committed to the 2030 Agenda. For that reason, we have increased the resources allocated to fulfilling the SDGs by more than 10 per cent. In that regard, I would like to highlight the work we have been carrying out in three priority areas for Peru: health, education and social protection.
Regarding health, faced with the worst dengue epidemic that Latin America has ever encountered, rapid action has been taken in Peru to reduce its death rate by half compared to the previous epidemic, and we are currently updating our dengue prevention and control strategies in accordance with World Health Organization guidelines.
In the search to provide quality education, we have placed emphasis on teacher training, and we are strengthening technical training at the secondary and higher levels, with the aim of ensuring that our young people enter the job market. In addition, we have launched an ambitious investment programme to close the gaps in educational infrastructure.
The third priority axis is social protection for development. As we are aware of the need to strengthen our food security and reduce the incidence of caloric deficits, we have increased the budget for our food supplementation programme, which supports the most vulnerable through soup kitchens and shelters, in coordination with local governments, the private sector and civil society. In terms of productive capacity, we have taken action to increase agricultural productivity and sustainability, mainly by promoting family farming. We have a series of social programmes aimed at combating poverty and social exclusion. We also have various public policies aimed at empowering women and girls and protecting them from male violence, including economic autonomy programmes. Peru’s social protection helps the fight against discrimination and racism and guarantees the collective rights of indigenous peoples and Afro-Peruvians and the provision of services with an intercultural approach, given that we are a multicultural, multi-ethnic and multilingual country.
However, as I have already pointed out, national efforts are not enough. Developed countries must honour their aid and financing pledges in order to reduce the budget gap and address the multiple needs. We must move towards urgent reform of the international financial architecture to build a more inclusive and equitable system. To that end, it is essential to review the way in which we measure progress, casting aside the practice of considering only the cold figures of gross domestic product (GDP). As we well know, GDP does not measure inequality, well-being or the environmental sustainability of countries. We therefore welcome the inclusion in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) of an initiative to develop new multidimensional indicators of progress in order to channel international cooperation more efficiently and inclusively, including in middle-income countries such as Peru, where pockets of poverty and exclusion persist.
The fight against poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, continues to be the greatest global challenge and must be the top priority for all of our countries. As I have highlighted, various programmes are being implemented in my country — such as the Together, Pension 55 and With You programmes — with the aim of reducing monetary poverty and extreme poverty generated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as providing basic social inclusion services to the least privileged sectors.
I would like to announce that Peru will submit to the General Assembly, as it does every two years, a draft resolution entitled “Human rights and extreme poverty”, whereby we encourage Member States to adopt more ambitious social protection policies, given that extreme poverty and exclusion violate human dignity.
We are also facing new challenges arising from the advance of new technologies, the potential and benefits of which are accompanied by multiple dangers, as well as unprecedented ethical and moral challenges. The social networks that have allowed us to be more communicative have also been used to spread misinformation and hate speech and as a vehicle for violence and harassment, particularly against women. Technology companies store the personal information of millions of people, leading to debates about the right to privacy and the risks of mass surveillance by Governments.
Artificial intelligence, which is presented as a positive element in our daily lives, also facilitates the spread of disinformation campaigns aimed at manipulating public opinion, especially in election periods, thereby destabilizing our democracies. We have a collective responsibility to ensure that new technologies are developed and used with full respect for the dignity, freedom and rights of all people. Clear principles and regulatory frameworks for digital governance must therefore be defined. In that regard, we welcome the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I), adopted at the Summit of the Future.
Peru’s commitment to human rights and democracy is unwavering. Those are the fundamental values that underpin Peruvian society and guide our foreign policy. Peru has a long tradition of respect for and promoting human rights, which is reflected in our participation in countless international treaties and instruments on the subject, as well as in our close cooperation with the United Nations and other international organizations that have visited our country and to whom we have always given our full cooperation. The strong democratic conviction of the Peruvian people guides our firm foreign policy in defence of representative democracy on the American continent and against any attempt to disregard the will of the people.
The lack of freedom and democratic methods of political participation, coupled with repression and a lack of opportunities, generate massive migratory and refugee flows that lead to pressures and social tensions in the host countries, especially if they do not have the economic capacity to absorb those people. We therefore renew our commitment to the process of reaching a binding global instrument that facilitates safe, orderly and regular migration with a human rights-based approach that provides predictability and protects migrants from transnational criminal organizations engaged in human smuggling and trafficking.
The pillars of Peru’s foreign policy that I have just described underpin our serious concern about the situation in Venezuela, especially since the electoral process that took place in that country on 28 July. The officially proclaimed results have not complied with the Venezuelan legal obligation to provide the original ballots in a spirit of transparency and impartiality and therefore do not legitimately reflect the popular will of the Venezuelan people. Peru does not recognize those official results.
Throughout its history, Peru has maintained a foreign policy that is firmly committed to multilateralism, the defence of international law and the promotion of the peaceful settlement of disputes — fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That diplomatic tradition explains our historic commitment to the Organization. We recall the contributions made by the likes of Víctor Andrés Belaúnde, former President of the General Assembly; José Luis Bustamante y Rivero, former President of the International Court of Justice; and, of course, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, the fifth Secretary-General of the United Nations, who serves as an inspiration to the members of our foreign service.
At a time marked by criticism of the scope of multilateralism, that legacy commits us to remain active in promoting an effective multilateralism that allows us to respond jointly to the enormous challenges that demand our collective action in areas as diverse as ensuring international peace and security, protecting the environment and mitigating climate change, ensuring the means of implementation to achieve sustainable development and fostering the regulation of new technologies. The President of the General Assembly can count on Peru’s firm support in reaching the necessary consensus that will allow us to make headway in that global task.
