Allow me to begin by congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. We also extend our deep gratitude to former President Dennis Francis for his leadership over the past year. We commend Secretary-General Guterres for his tireless efforts in advocating for a more secure, prosperous and sustainable world. It is that shared vision that unites us today.
This year, Palau proudly celebrates 30 years of independence. On 1 October 1994, Palau became a sovereign nation, and shortly thereafter the 185th Member of the United Nations. To honour the journey that has brought us here, we have chosen the theme “The people are the anchor of Palau’s conservation and identity”. That phrase encapsulates what has sustained us through decades of challenges and progress alike. Our people are the foundation of our efforts to protect our environment, culture and way of life. That was further underscored during our Voluntary National Review presentation this year, which centred around the theme “Harnessing our cultural heritage to build back better for a sustainable future”. It highlighted the pivotal role of our culture and people in shaping a future that not only fosters development and enhances quality of life, but also safeguards our natural resources, homes and the environment that has sustained us for generations.
Palau begins its pursuit of equality with the critical role that women play in our society. It is crucial to leverage our recent advancements and collective experiences. That was highlighted at the first-ever Meeting of Women in Elected Leadership, held in Palau on 20 September 2023. Over the past four years, we have undertaken initiatives that empower women in their traditional roles, such as the keepers of the mesei — the taro patch — enabling them to scale their entrepreneurial ventures and raise their profiles. Those efforts are giving our women a pathway into entrepreneurship and business, amplifying their voices in new arenas.
Food security is central to Palau’s long-term resilience. We have set a national goal to reduce food imports from 80 per cent to 60 per cent by 2030. By promoting local food production, we not only preserve our traditions but also combat non-communicable diseases linked to overreliance on imported, processed foods.
As a small island developing State (SID), Palau, like many others, confronts unique challenges that threaten our economic development, environment and survival. While SIDS contribute less than 1 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions, we bear the brunt of the climate crisis. Palau has experienced the unmistakable signs of climate change first-hand. More intense storms, landslides and prolonged droughts are becoming the new normal. The ripple effects of climate disasters globally have caused the cost of imported goods to skyrocket, further jeopardizing our food security and economic stability. The global response to climate change is a matter of life and death. Through the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and other international frameworks, we have underscored the vulnerabilities of island nations like ours.
One of the most urgent challenges for SIDS is sea level rise. Many of our islands sit just a few metres above sea level, leaving us vulnerable to coastal erosion, flooding and storm surges. That is not only a present threat but an existential crisis for future generations. In Palau, we are taking steps to relocate critical infrastructure, including our national hospital and schools, to protect our people from rising waters and climate-related disasters. Adaptation is vital to our survival. Our National Adaptation Plan prioritizes both immediate and long-term actions to build resilience. We focus on protecting our mesei, vital ecosystems and sustainable development, guided by our traditional conservation practice, bul, which has sustained us for generations.
Mitigation is equally important. Palau is committed to reducing carbon emissions and transitioning to renewable energy. Solar, wind and ocean energy provide opportunities to reduce reliance on imported fossil fuels and secure a cleaner, more sustainable future. Our nationally determined contributions reflect that commitment and we remain mindful of the environmental impacts of renewable energy waste, such as solar panels and batteries, which require responsible management.
As co-Chair of the High-Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, alongside Norway, Palau plays a vital role in shaping global ocean governance. The Ocean Panel, now composed of 19 nations with the addition of the United Arab Emirates, remains committed to advancing the sustainable use of oceans through science-driven policies. We expect the 2025 United Nations Ocean Conference in Nice, France, to be a pivotal moment for accelerating ocean action, and we encourage more nations to join us in that mission.
As the first to ratify the international legally binding instrument under the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ), Palau remains steadfast in conserving and sustainably using marine biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. The treaty symbolizes global unity in safeguarding our oceans and we urge international solidarity to ratify the BBNJ treaty swiftly so it can enter into force.
Palau has also declared a national moratorium on deep-sea mining, reaffirming our unwavering commitment to preserving marine ecosystems. We call on the global community to exercise vigilance in protecting marine resources until we have a thorough understanding of the impacts of deep-sea mining.
Our commitment to a sustainable blue economy is reflected in the Unlocking Blue Pacific Prosperity (UBPP) initiative, launched at the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The UBPP unites Pacific island nations in addressing the dual challenges of climate change and ocean health. Supported by the Bezos Earth Fund and other partners, we aim to achieve 100 per cent effective ocean management and to protect 30 per cent of the blue Pacific continent, covering over 1 billion hectares.
Palau is set to assume the Chair of the Alliance of Small Island Developing States from 2025 to 2026. We are committed to leading the group of 39 member States in advancing the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, ensuring that our voices remain central in global discussions. Our priorities will include expanding access to climate finance, strengthening resilience and promoting a sustainable future for all island nations.
Palau highlights the importance of the multidimensional vulnerability index (MVI) in assessing the challenges faced by SIDS. Traditional metrics like gross domestic product do not capture the economic and environmental shocks that disproportionately affect our nations. The MVI offers a comprehensive assessment to help us advocate for the support we need from financial institutions and global partners.
We must address the urgent need for Security Council reform. The world has changed dramatically since the United Nations was founded and the Security Council must evolve to meet today’s realities. Equitable representation, including permanent and non-permanent members, is essential. We support Japan’s bid for a permanent seat and believe that SIDS should also be represented on the Council to provide a voice for those on the front lines of global challenges.
Finally, we continue to strengthen our national security through partnerships with allies, including the United States, Australia, Japan and Taiwan. As Vice-President and Minister of Justice, I emphasize the need for robust law enforcement and maritime cooperation frameworks. With INTERPOL membership and enhanced cyberdefence capabilities, we are better equipped to protect our borders and our people.
Palau reaffirms its strong and enduring relationship with Taiwan and calls for its meaningful participation in international organizations. Taiwan’s exclusion undermines the principles of inclusivity and cooperation that the United Nations represents. Resolution 2758 (XXVI) does not preclude Taiwan’s involvement in efforts related to the Sustainable Development Goals and we urge the Assembly to support Taiwan’s rightful inclusion.
Today I stand here with a call to action. We must unite to confront the existential threat of climate change, protect our oceans and ensure that no nation, no matter how small, is left behind. We must prioritize science, conservation and the well-being of our people. As President Whipps said earlier this year, “The road ahead requires unity, resilience and collective action”. Palau cannot mitigate the climate crisis alone. We need global cooperation to reduce emissions and safeguard our planet for future generations.
