It is my honour to address the General Assembly once again on behalf of the people of Papua New Guinea.
I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang and the Government and the people of Cameroon on his successful election to lead the work of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
I thank his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for his excellent leadership during the seventy-eighth session.
I also extend my gratitude to the Secretary-General for his strong leadership in mobilizing the support of the global community on key issues that require our collective efforts, especially in dealing with climate change-related matters.
The President’s selected theme for this debate, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, is very pertinent. I thank him and commend his foresight in drawing our collective attention to the work we must still do for peace and humanity, considering the vast challenges and continuous threats we face today. I will speak on three threats to humankind that are complementary to that theme. Those threats, in my view, are religious intolerance, poverty induced by climate change and geopolitical differences, and sovereignty contests over territories and people. I will preface my statement with my country as a backdrop.
Papua New Guinea is the world’s most culturally and linguistically diverse nation, with over 830 languages and a myriad of sub-ethnicities and sub-cultures that are still authentically indigenous today. A real-time, modern-day nation of 1,000 tribes, we embrace that diversity and do our best to function as one people, one nation and one country in our intention to leave no one behind. In terms of the environment, my country hosts up to 7 per cent of the world’s biodiversity, mostly housed within a tropical rainforest that is the third-largest in the world and a vast marine ecosystem. We sustainably manage our forest, land and sea because our livelihood depends on them.
Papua New Guinea, in our small way, teaches the world how to live in balance with nature, tolerate cultural diversities and practice environmental stewardship. The father of modern Papua New Guinea, the late, great Grand Chief Sir Michael Thomas Somare, was a champion in that regard. In fact, Sir Michael championed article 5 of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change into existence in the early 2000s as a reflection of Papua New Guinea’s strong affinity for the forest, land and sea. In that regard, my country has been contributing to the global discourse over the past two decades on environment management and matters relating to climate change. Unfortunately, that has been met with very little return action. However, we continue to stand ready to assist the United Nations family in that area.
Over the 49-years of our country’s history as an independent nation, our challenges have been many, compounded by the vast ethnolinguistic diversities and cultural complexities and the small size of our economy. However, we have remained one people and one nation. Forty-nine years ago, we started off as a least developing nation; today, we have attained middle-income nation status and we intend, over the next 20 years, to transition to a higher-income earning status by 2045. In doing so, we will migrate from being a mere raw resource exporter to a manufacturing economy within the next decade.
I want to assure the General Assembly that we have aligned our development plans consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Our aspirations mirror those of this institution. In fact, in 1975, when we gained our independence, our National Constitution’s Eight-Point Plan directed the Administration of today and those of the future in our national aspiration to leave no person behind. Our nation’s Vision 2050, launched in 2010, compels the Government to develop Papua New Guinea into a top-50 nation by 2050 in terms of the Human Development Index. Papua New Guinea looks forward to submitting to the United Nations a full progress report in July 2025 at the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development through its second Voluntary National Review, covering the work we have undertaken thus far, the challenges we continue to face and the steps we are taking going forward that will culminate in 2030.
I hope that Members will indulge me in sharing an insight into managing a diverse, multicultural people and what has helped us to blend as one nation. I highlight the role of Christian missionaries and their work dating back to 1845, when the first Catholic missionaries arrived in my country. In 1975, when we gained independence, Christianity became profound. Consistent with the President’s theme, Christianity in Papua New Guinea has been the front-runner of unity, bearing messages of peace and sustainable coexistence and embracing the diversity of cultures, languages and tribes into one human family living in our natural environment as God’s creation. Since then, Christian churches have contributed immensely to our country’s development through their education and health programmes. Real Christianity teaches love, peace, unity, forgiveness and continues to give meaning to the mission to leave no one behind.
Whilst Papua New Guinea is identified as a Christian nation, I want to assure all who are listening that section 45 of our nation’s Constitution protects individuals’ right to choose and practice their own faith and religion. We subscribe strongly to article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on freedom of thought, conscience and religion. The United Nations has been the anchor of that God-given right of humankind, and I offer my country’s support for the protection of individuals’ choice and rights to practice their faith and urge that this remains a key duty of the United Nations.
History teaches us that, since the dawn of humankind, many wars have been fought and many lives lost as a result of religious intolerance. We see that happening today. Earth’s history is stained with the blood of innocent people who have died in State-, tribe- or church-sanctioned killings. The United Nations must condemn laws that encroach upon individuals’ choice of religion and worship. That is a God-given right. I see the issue of the enforcement of religions upon another as a threat to peace and the coexistence of humankind. I ask the United Nations to keep watch over religious freedom for all people, especially minorities in societies where major religions are practiced.
The second threat I see facing humankind is poverty, especially that induced by climate change. The pursuit of wealth has caused man to plunder Earth of its resources beyond the threshold of sustainability, with little consideration for our children’s future. The acceleration of climate change, for instance, is a direct result of humankind’s insatiable appetite for resources. In an attitude of survival of the fittest, nations and corporations jostle and stampede over each other in order to harvest resources, causing environmental degradation, deforestation, the burning of cheap fossil fuels and pollution, spiralling our planet into climate catastrophes that will further engender poverty.
Ocean nations like mine continue to live with climate change-induced sea level rise and weather pattern changes that have now become an existential threat. That is why we welcome the Chair’s summary of the High-Level Meeting on Sea-Level Rise. Together with other Pacific island countries, we continue to recognize the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as the legal framework within which all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out. We reaffirm our commitment to the Pacific Islands Forum Declaration on the Continuity of Statehood and the Protection of Persons in the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise. Last month, the Pacific Island Leaders Forum in Tonga officially recognized those climate change manifestations as existential threats to our Pacific people. We stand united in support of the Vanuatu-led General Assembly proposal for the inclusion of sea level rise as a stand-alone item on the General Assembly’s agenda and other relevant United Nations processes.
Despite our economic needs, Papua New Guinea remains committed to safeguarding both our blue ocean life and our green forest life for Earth’s children. As a rainforest nation, Papua New Guinea continues to play a proactive role to progress our commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement by undertaking adaptation and mitigation efforts. However, accessing global climate financing continues to be a challenge for Papua New Guinea and many other small nations. We call on the United Nations to look into that matter with a sense of urgency or else we will utilize our rights to liquidate our forest and marine resources to achieve our development aspirations, especially in our efforts to alleviate poverty. It is for that reason that I speak in solidarity with all forest nations, especially those in the Congo and Amazon basins, in our quest for adequate compensation if we are to preserve our forests, which are in fact the lungs of the Earth.
Papua New Guinea’s vast rainforests, rich biodiversity, marine life and indigenous people and cultures are now at the crossroads of great change, facing either preservation or loss and extinction. The responsibility to save our environment and the planet should bear on all of us in equal measure. It is now up to Members of the United Nations to save the forests, which are global assets. On that note, I want to thank my good friend Emmanuel Macron, President of France, for mobilizing European Union funding for the Managalas Conservation Area in my country. That is the kind of partnership that should be encouraged. Again, I remind the world that the forest of Papua New Guinea is a global asset and it must be preserved at a price transferable to improving the lives of my forest people. We cannot talk about climate change without a conversation on forestry. They are two sides of the same coin in conversations on climate change. I call for others out there, especially those that have big carbon footprints, to do justice to planet Earth by playing their part, especially in the preservation of our forests.
The third threat facing humankind, in my view, is geopolitical differences and sovereignty contests over territories and people. Increasing geopolitical conflicts and tensions are fuelling fragmentation and protectionism around the world today. Restrictions on trade, disruptions in supply chains and growing competition are crippling our local economies. We need to examine peaceful strategies and solutions and invest in peacebuilding initiatives for de-escalation, mutual understanding and cooperation to build trust and foster peaceful relationships. The United Nations role in that must be respected by all nations, for it was for those very reasons that the United Nations was born, so that the world does not need to face many wars or another big war again.
I say that violence begets violence and is evil no matter what the justification may be. Violence begets violence. Peace must be achieved by peaceful means, no matter how long or unjust it may seem. Peace must be achieved by peaceful means. We live in a time where, at the press of a button, a nuclear bomb has the potential and ability to destroy our planet. All conflicts can be resolved if we allow the United Nations rule book to take prominence over our own parochial interests.
In Papua New Guinea, we partner the United Nations in national and sub-national peacebuilding efforts. One good example is in the de-escalation of our own internal conflict on Bougainville, where the United Nations-supervised the Bougainville Peace Agreement in 2001 and continues to ensure that we comply with all requirements of that Agreement, including by bringing the 2019 referendum results to our national Parliament. I am happy to report that, to this day, no bullets have since been fired on Bougainville. That is the role and strength of United Nations, and I call on all nations and people to respect the Charter of this institution and the reasons for its existence. Papua New Guinea therefore calls on the United Nations and its systems to begin the process of Security Council reform, including the removal of the veto power so that all nations can sit equally at the table in as far as decision-making is concerned.
We must do all we can to restore stability to the far reaches of Earth. Global conflicts have domino effects and the subsequent impacts are felt throughout the world with intergenerational wounds.
As I conclude, let me recall again our collective responsibility to work together to preserve our planet and our human race. In 1987, space philosopher Frank White wrote of the overview effect, a cognitive shift astronauts experience after viewing Earth from outer space and returning to Earth. He records that most astronauts, if not all, experience a state of self-transcendence, appreciating Earth much more and feeling very strong connections with all people on the planet. I am sure that Neil Armstrong, on 20 July 1969, when he gazed back on planet Earth from the moon, would not have seen his country, the United States of America, but the blue planet he called home.
I call upon all us leaders of the planet to adopt a little bit of the overview effect to see the world through the eyes of astronauts. They see the planet from humanity’s perspective — one planet, one people, one humankind. They appreciate Earth much better. I want to ask all leaders of planet Earth to appreciate Earth. Let us treasure its life-sustaining gifts. Let us do everything within our means to preserve and protect planet Earth.
That starts with all of us leaders thinking and acting correctly because our children’s collective future depends on us. We have but one planet, after all. There are no two planets. When we look billions upon billions of lightyears into the observable universe, there is no planet that looks like ours. We have only one planet; let us preserve it. Let us rise above religious bigotry, fight poverty together and coexist in peace, under the Charter we ourselves have written for this magnificent institution called the United Nations.
