I would like to express my sincere congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang on his election to the position of President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. Poland fully supports his mission and wishes him every success. I also want to extend my thanks to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for his effective presidency during the seventy-eighth session.
I am honoured to be addressing the General Assembly for the tenth time as President of Poland, all the more so because today we are facing huge global challenges that require our solidarity, cooperation and determination. Our presence here reminds us of the mission that the United Nations was established to fulfil after the terrible tragedy of the Second World War — to prevent further conflicts and ensure world peace. This year we mark the eighty-fifth anniversary of the beginning of that massive conflict, which claimed millions of lives. It was Poland that became its first victim. On 1 September 1939, Nazi Germany attacked my homeland and started the Second World War. Two weeks later, on 17 September, the Soviet Union also invaded my country, as an ally of Nazi Germany fulfilling the agreement between Hitler and Stalin — the so-called Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. Both aggressors deprived us of our independence. Poland found itself in the midst of a brutal occupation by two totalitarianisms, becoming a witness and victim of war crimes that left a mark on our nation and our world’s history forever. In my country we know very well what war is, and we know what tragedy and suffering it brings. That is why Poland has always been a strong advocate of measures aimed at preventing conflicts and ensuring peace in the world. Our history and experience incline us to constantly recall the need to respect international law and protect the sovereignty of States.
Today we are once again facing an extremely serious threat to global security. For the past two and a half years we have been watching Russia’s brutal aggression against neighbouring Ukraine. It is a flagrant violation of fundamental norms of international law such as the prohibition of the use of force in international relations. The unprovoked aggression is destabilizing the region and posing a direct threat to global order and security. We cannot allow the war to turn into another frozen conflict. That is the most important task for the future. That is why it is so important today to stop the Russian war in Ukraine, not only to end the suffering of Ukrainians and punish the aggressor but to prevent such heinous actions from becoming a model for others to follow. Ukraine’s territorial integrity must be restored within its internationally recognized borders. The logic of conquest and disregard for international law must be stopped, unless we want to agree to live in a world where any country can become a victim of aggression, regardless of its size or location.
Poland is following with equal concern the situation in the Middle East, where the conflict has escalated owing to the brutal Hamas attacks of 7 October 2023. Israel, like every other State, has a right to self-defence. However, those actions must follow international humanitarian law. Poland has consistently supported a two-State solution to the Middle East conflict that would guarantee the right of both Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace and security and with good relations with all their neighbours. As proponents of the principles of equality and the right of nations to self-determination, we believe that the emergence of an independent Palestine would not contradict Israel’s interests, while Israel’s right to exist cannot be questioned. The two nations are united by space and time, which will remain their common destiny.
We are also deeply concerned about the current situation in Yemen. The ongoing humanitarian crisis is affecting millions of people, and the struggle for control in the country poses a threat to regional security and freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. The international community must do everything possible to ease the suffering of the Yemeni people and restore stability in their country. And we can all see how the ongoing wars, conflicts and terrorist acts in Africa are undermining people’s efforts to live and develop in safe and fair conditions. The world must stand with all who are affected by insecurity and help them restore peace through reconciliation and social cohesion.
We cannot achieve peace and security in the world without respect for the law. As President of Poland, I constantly repeat the phrase “peace through law”, always emphasizing the fundamental role of international law in maintaining the global order. Our history and experiences have taught us that only adherence to international norms and the protection of the rights of every human being can ensure stability and development. As a country of freedom and solidarity, Poland will always demand respect for human rights, regardless of where they are threatened. Poland has therefore decided to run for a seat on the Human Rights Council for the 2029– 2031 term. Our candidacy is an expression of our commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights around the world. We believe that human rights are the foundation of peace and security. Their violation leads to conflicts, while their protection results in stability and development.
We in Poland perfectly understand the perspective of countries that have experienced colonialism. Our history — from losing our statehood in the eighteenth century, to the Second World War, to the fall of communism — has taught us how precious freedom, sovereignty and human dignity are. That is part of our DNA, and we therefore stand with the developing countries in their quest for prosperity, equal treatment and self-reliance. That is why Poland will not stop supporting African societies, as I had the opportunity to personally assure my friends during my visits this year to Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania, as well as in recent years on my previous visits to the continent, which is so important for Poland, Europe and the whole world in building a shared, safer and more prosperous future. We believe that Africa has the potential to develop its own solutions to its challenges.
However, we recognize that global development in many parts of the world is currently facing serious obstacles. We note with concern that halfway through the deadline for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals set by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the progress made in realizing its ambitions is still insufficient. During this session, Poland will serve as a Vice President of the Economic and Social Council. The motto of our mandate in the Council is “Developing in solidarity”, which is a good summary of our vision of the progress we need. With its forthcoming presidency of the Council of the European Union, which starts on 1 January 2025, Poland will also seek to give new impetus to relations with developing partners. There is a need for better cooperation, real partnership and more solidarity.
Next year we will celebrate the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations. Despite its imperfections, the United Nations remains the foundation of the world order, allowing us to work together for peace, development and human dignity. We believe that the Summit of the Future has given us an opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness of our work and the possibility of improving United Nations structures to make them more responsive to today’s challenges. Poland is ready to discuss reform of the Security Council and other key United Nations bodies, as well as international financial institutions. The world is changing, and our system must change as well if we are to better serve the global community. Our common commitment, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, is to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Poland will remain faithful to that mission and will support efforts for peace, human rights and sustainable development. I wish all of us fruitful deliberations.
