Allow me first of all to congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I am confident that his able stewardship will lead this session to excellent fruition.
The current session of the General Assembly is convened at a time when the existence and development of humankind are faced with unprecedentedly serious crises and challenges. Armed conflicts and bloodshed continue unabated in various parts of the world, with the situation in Gaza still going on for almost a year, taking the lives of tens of thousands of innocent civilians and creating the most appalling humanitarian crisis since the Second World War. To make matters worse, ever-deteriorating abnormal weather conditions, such as extreme high temperatures, drought, torrential rain and flood, cause massive human and material losses, coupled with such problems as the food and energy crises, unemployment and poverty and social inequality.
In addition, confrontation, bloc-forming and unilateralism prevail over the spirit of cooperation, unity and multilateralism that runs through the Charter of the United Nations, creating obstacles to tackling international crises. Therefore, I expect that the general debate, true to its theme and spirit, will serve as a significant occasion in overcoming the challenges and crises threatening humankind’s existence and development, defending the United Nations-centred multilateral system and promoting peace and advancement of the present and future generations.
I consider it important for each and every United Nations Member State to fully discharge its responsibility with a view to overcoming present crises and promoting social progress and better standards of living, as stated in the Charter of the United Nations. From that perspective, I would like to outline the principled stand of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government and its efforts directed at achieving socioeconomic development, defending regional peace and stability and realizing international justice.
Today, the world is faced with challenges and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is no exception in that regard. However, valuable successes are being recorded in the socioeconomic field, thanks to the correct line of the Government and its steady implementation. First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government has made it a primary State policy to continue supplying children under school age with dairy products and to provide schoolchildren with essential station ery at the State’s expense. As a result of the strenuous execution of the policy, we have witnessed continued improvement in the quality of childcare and education.
We have also achieved results in our efforts to achieve the sustainable development of the national economy. The trend of growth continues in various fields, such as light industry and agriculture, and remarkable successes are being registered in promoting the welfare of the people, including efforts to provide all residents of both urban and rural areas with new homes free of charge. In particular, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government recently adopted a policy for regional development and is paying primary attention to its practical implementation.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government’s regional development policy is aimed at effecting an epoch-making enhancement in socioeconomic, material and cultural standards at the national scale by bridging the gap between the capital and provincial cities and between urban and rural areas and developing all sectors and regions of the country in a balanced and simultaneous way within a 10-year time frame. This will make an active contribution from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) towards achieving sustainable development for everyone and ensuring that no one is left behind. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s regional development policy is firmly assured of its feasibility, as it is based on scientific accuracy and justness. In 10 years’ time, the world will witness a completely changed status of development in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The aforementioned work for socioeconomic development in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has never been undertaken in a peaceful and normal security environment. A peaceful and stable external environment is very dear to us, who aspire to overall development and the prosperity of the State, and yet the security threat forced upon us from the outside is ever-increasing with the passage of time. Last year, I stated from this rostrum that the situation on the Korean peninsula was nearing the brink of nuclear conflict (see A/78/PV.14).
One year has passed since then. Now, the security landscape on the Korean peninsula is quite different from that time and becoming much more acute. Since the beginning of the year, the United States and its allies have staged joint military exercises one after another under various code names, such as Freedom Shield, Freedom Edge and joint air drills, in the vicinity of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, thereby heightening military tension and the hostile atmosphere in the region. Much more serious is the fact that the anti-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea nuclear war machine, the Nuclear Consultative Group engineered by the United States and the Republic of Korea last year, is now in full operation and simulation nuclear war drills are being conducted to put into practice an actual attempt to use nuclear weapons against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Joining in are the States members of NATO, an outside force from beyond the region and an exclusive military bloc. They are strengthening military cooperation with the United States and the Republic of Korea, abusing the aegis of the United Nations Command, which should have been dismantled decades ago pursuant to resolution 3390 (XXX). They are stirring up military confrontation still further by deploying warships and aircraft in the hot spot region of the Korean peninsula. That being the case, they blame us for threatening them and the peace and stability of the region and beyond with nuclear weapons.
Moreover, who developed and used nuclear weapons against humankind for the first time in history? Who introduced nuclear weapons into the Korean peninsula in the last century and poses a nuclear threat to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in this century? Who on Earth is talking unhesitatingly about the end of the regime of a sovereign State and maintaining the first use of nuclear weapons against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as its national policy?
It is not the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ’s possession of nuclear weapons that makes the United States hostile towards us. The truth is that the United States’ hostility and nuclear threat to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for over 70 years has compelled us to make a historic decision to possess nuclear weapons. Our nuclear weapons have been manufactured and exist only to defend ourselves. As such, any talk about the nuclear threat we pose only proves a conceived hostility towards the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The security environment on the Korean peninsula is also bound to be intricately complicated through the next generation unless the United States and its followers change their confrontational and aggressive nature. In such circumstances, it is an indispensable exercise of the sovereign right of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to maintain powerful strength capable of defending its national security interests and guaranteeing peaceful development.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has not descended into war even though it is fraught with extreme tension. That is totally attributable to our country’s powerful war deterrence, which helps stave off the threat of aggression and maintain the balance of power in the region. Therefore, we continue to increase our war deterrence capabilities, not only out of our obligation to ensure national security but also because of our mission to maintain peace and security in the region and beyond.
Comrade Kim Jong Un, President of the State Affairs of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, has said that we can choose either dialogue or confrontation, but we should go further in getting ourselves fully prepared for confrontation. That is the assessment and conclusion drawn from the 30-year Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-United States relations, he said. When it comes to the right to self-defence, a legitimate right of a sovereign State, we will never go back to the far-off past. When it comes to national prestige, we will never bargain over it with anyone, for it was gained through the bloody struggle of the entire Korean people. Regardless of who takes office in the United States, we will deal only with the State entity called the United States, not its mere Administration. Likewise, any United States Administration will have to face the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which is different from what the United States used to think.
It is the unvarying external policy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government to champion justice and peace, aspire to progress and development and promote friendship and solidarity. That is also the idea running through the United Nations Charter. From that viewpoint, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government stands strongly against attempts to divide the international political arena into two camps through unlawful double standards, giving precedence to their hegemonic interests and disturbing peace and stability.
At present, many factors are obstructing the attainment of the SDGs set by the United Nations. The most critical among those are the high-handedness, arbitrariness and double standards of the United States and certain United Nations Member States. Since October last year, the indiscriminate massacre by the Israeli authorities has claimed more than 40,000 Palestinian civilian lives in the Gaza Strip, including those of many children and women, and thereby exposed a nation to complete extinction.
The United Nations exists to prevent the recurrence of the scourge of war that has inflicted untold suffering on humankind. It is really shameful and deplorable that such an act against humanity has persisted for a year. It is hardly imaginable that one State can be immune to any censure and sanction even after committing such a horrible massacre. That is entirely due to the patronage of the United States, a permanent member of the Security Council. The United States has vetoed Security Council resolutions on bringing peace to the Middle East on as many as five occasions, overriding the wishes of the international community to see the ethnic cleansing stopped by its ally. That is how the United States has discredited the authority of the United Nations and incited crimes against humanity. That notwithstanding, the United States is branding as a threat and a provocation the legitimate exercise of the right to self-defence by a sovereign State that has done no harm to anybody.
As for the Ukrainian situation, it has been prolonged for almost three years by the United States and Western countries. They are blaming other countries even though it is the result of the eastward expansion of NATO and the provision of lethal equipment worth astronomical sums of money to their ally. The reason behind the United States abusive invectives about the normal development of relations among other countries is in fact to vindicate its unprincipled political and military support for its ally and justify the forming of military alliances on a global scale. Justice or injustice is judged according to whether the actor is pro-United States or an independent country and the United Nations is misused for the political aims of an individual country. That reality should no longer be tolerated or allowed.
I once again express serious concern and strongly denounce the fact that peace and security in many parts of the world are seriously threatened and that the spirit of the United Nations Charter is being debased by the arbitrariness and high-handedness of a single, arrogant permanent member of the Security Council. I also offer deep condolences to the Palestinian victims of the Israeli genocide and their bereaved families and extend unwavering support and solidarity to the Syrian people in their struggle to regain the occupied Golan Heights and safeguard the territorial integrity of their country.
The reform of the present global governance regime should be oriented towards realizing impartiality, equity and justice. The United Nations will restore its sacred image only when it strictly adheres to the principles of sovereign equality, non-interference in internal affairs, impartiality and objectivity and eliminates high-handedness and arbitrariness, as well as biased double standard practices in all its activities, in conformity with the purposes and principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
A just, peaceful and prosperous world remains the desire of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as ever. It is the consistent stand of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Government to make positive, independent efforts against imperialism as its immutable primary national policy to achieve international justice based on respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and establish a new international order.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will, in the future too, cooperate with all countries and nations that oppose and reject aggression, interference, domination and subordination and aspire to independence and justice, transcending differences in ideas and systems. We will also develop diversified exchanges and cooperation with the countries that respect our country and adopt a friendly attitude to us.
