I congratulate the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, Mr Philemon Yang, on his election and wish him every success.
I express special appreciation for the tireless work of Secretary-General António Guterres. The reforms he has promoted since 2017 have contributed to the effective improvement of the functioning of the United Nations. He knows that he enjoys Portugal’s full support.
As this is the first time I am addressing the Assembly, I can only recognize the weight of responsibility that falls on all of us, the representatives of the peoples of the United Nations. I do so at a particularly demanding time, marked by the confluence of multiple global challenges and crises and growing geopolitical tensions.
But I also do so with hope and confidence — hope, because this year we are celebrating 50 years of freedom in my country. The Portuguese people, in freedom, clamoured for democracy, peace and development, and thus the arc of history was bent. At a time when autocracies in many parts of the world are threatening democracy, we have confidence in the strength of freedom. At a time when we are facing major threats to peace, we have confidence in the strength of multilateralism and collective responsibility. At a time when development challenges are becoming more acute, we have faith in economic growth as the engine of fair and sustainable progress.
Portugal is an uncompromising advocate of multilateralism as a way to cooperate and organize the international system. That is why we support the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), adopted within the framework of the Summit of the Future, which illustrates the vision and reforming spirit of Secretary-General António Guterres. The Pact reflects a renewed source of hope in multilateralism and in the three central pillars of United Nations action: sustainable development, human rights and international peace and security.
It is with that confidence in multilateralism that Portugal, with the continuity and coherence that characterizes our foreign policy, is a candidate for a seat as a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the 2027-2028 biennium. We are guided by the will to work to prevent conflicts, promote a spirit of partnership and protect people in the face of traditional threats such as terrorism and emerging threats such as biosecurity. We are determined to contribute to a more just, peaceful and inclusive international order, founded on international law and based on the Charter of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has said in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) that multilateralism faces a fundamental dilemma — “a breakdown or a breakthrough”. We do not hesitate. We want to move forward with the reform of the global governance system to guarantee greater representativeness, transparency, justice and cooperation. That is the path that the Pact for the Future shows us — redesigning the international financial architecture and promoting greater alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals. With Burundi, we led the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development to ensure that no country has to choose between fighting poverty or saving the planet.
On another front, we are in favour of reforming the Security Council to make it more representative, agile and functional. Its composition is outdated and the absence of representatives from some regions hampers its functioning. Portugal supports the African Common Position and the aspirations of Brazil and India to become permanent members. Small and medium-sized countries, including small island States, should also have their representation strengthened. As far as working methods are concerned, we support the limitation and greater scrutiny of the use of the veto. Before being a power, the right of the veto represents a responsibility, and that is how it should be exercised, preventing a party to a conflict from being both judge and judged.
While the war continues, with terrible consequences inside and outside Ukraine, the Security Council has sat by in silence on several occasions. With respect to Lebanon, we hope that the Security Council can be effective in preventing increasing escalation. Even when resolutions are adopted, they often remain unimplemented. It is imperative that, in Gaza and the Sudan, all parties do their utmost to ensure the full implementation of the resolutions adopted by the Council.
The world is now more prosperous overall, but socioeconomic divides are widening. Eradicating poverty and hunger are the first two Sustainable Development Goals, but chronic hunger is on the rise, affecting one in ten people globally. Acute food insecurity has increased almost threefold since 2016. In that context, we welcome the Global Alliance Against Hunger and Poverty, proposed by the Brazilian presidency of the Group of 20.
The hope we are talking about can be realized only if we are able to respond to the needs of millions of people affected by conflict. The situations in Ukraine, Gaza, the Sudan, Myanmar, the Sahel and now Lebanon are examples of the suffering of millions of people forced to leave their homes and families. I am also talking about climate refugees. Rising temperatures, forest fires — which tragically hit my country recently — drought and other extreme weather events have forced millions to move.
At the same time, disrespect for the rights of women and girls and persecution on religious or sexual grounds have become more and more widespread in various parts of the world. The context of human rights protection has been severely weakened and threatened. It is our collective responsibility to guarantee respect for and the protection and realization of human rights. New technologies, such as artificial intelligence, are an opportunity, but they also create risks. The Pact for the Future points the way to a virtuous balance in that area.
We must act to combat all forms of discrimination and hatred that undermine the cohesion of our societies. In that context, we will continue to defend the rights of young people. The high-level meeting of the General Assembly on youth, which, at Portugal’s request, will be held here next year time to mark the thirtieth anniversary of the World Programme of Action for Youth, will be an opportunity to move forward on that front. That is a priority for Portugal at home and abroad.
Peace is the primary objective of the United Nations, and here too we must see a sign of hope. The Russian Federation’s war of aggression against Ukraine is a flagrant violation of international law, which we strongly condemn. The negative effects of the war — the food, energy and inflation crises — are echoing around the world, with the greatest impact on the most fragile regions.
We are also deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation and the dangerous escalation in the Middle East region. In view of the events in Lebanon, we call on the parties to exercise maximum restraint to avoid escalation. We firmly condemn the horrific terrorist attacks perpetrated by Hamas on 7 October 2023 and demand the release of all hostages.
We will not stand by idly in the face of the humanitarian disaster and the growing number of civilian victims in Gaza. It is imperative to unconditionally cease hostilities, guarantee the entry of humanitarian aid and respect international humanitarian law. It is also imperative to resume negotiations with a view to implementing the two-State solution, the only one that can bring peace and stability to the region. Portugal is opposed to the expansion of settlements, the confiscation of land in the occupied Palestinian territories and the actions of settlers that constitute violations of international law and obstacles to peace.
It is our common interest and shared responsibility to ensure strict respect for international law and humanitarian law. We need to step up our commitment to conflict prevention and mediation, particularly in Africa. I highlight Portugal’s consistent presence in United Nations peacekeeping operations and European Union missions, with national forces deployed in Mozambique, Somalia, South Sudan, the Central African Republic and the Gulf of Guinea.
I would also emphasize the contribution of the Economic Community of West African State and the African Union to efforts to promote stability in the region. Only African solutions will provide sustainable answers to the challenges facing the continent. Portugal supported Security Council resolution 2719 (2023), which allows for the establishment of regular United Nations contributions to the financing of African Union peace operations mandated by the Security Council. We also support the Secretary-General’s proposals to establish regular contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.
Portugal is a maritime country; 97 per cent of our territory is ocean. We understand the vital role of the ocean in the global economy and in combating climate change. We strongly support the sustainable management and governance of the oceans and the development of a new, sustainable blue economy, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We consider capacity-building in ocean-related issues to be a matter of priority and have designed a scholarship programme aimed at developing countries, with a special focus on small island developing States (SIDS).
The Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction was a victory for multilateralism. We will remain committed to its entry into force. Portugal calls for a joint effort to finalize an ambitious treaty to eliminate plastic pollution by the end of this year.
Climate change is the existential threat of our time. Portugal remains committed to investing in renewable energies and phasing out fossil fuels. We want to incorporate 47 per cent renewables into final energy consumption by 2030. We have also favoured the introduction of innovative financial mechanisms, including for SIDS. An example of that is the agreements signed by Portugal with Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe to transform debt into climate investment, thus supporting the energy transition.
The success of the 2030 Agenda will mainly benefit the most vulnerable groups. We cannot leave anyone behind. The digital transition and emerging technologies represent a renewed opportunity to facilitate a more prosperous, fair, inclusive and sustainable future. Connectivity is a cornerstone. The path seems clear; technological development needs to be conceived through a human-centred lens and based on international law.
To conclude, I am very proud to speak before the General Assembly in Portuguese. In addition to being the fourth most spoken language in the world as a mother tongue, today uniting more than 260 million people on all continents, Portuguese is an official and working language in 33 international organizations, including the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP). That is why the CPLP’s ambition to have the Portuguese language recognized as an official language of the United Nations is legitimate. Just yesterday, I agreed with President Lula da Silva of Brazil that we are committed and willing to work together with all Portuguese-speaking countries to achieve that goal.
The legitimacy of the United Nations, its convening power and its global normative authority, combined with its multidisciplinary expertise, are among its unique assets that must be harnessed in favour of our common causes and a shared vision of the future. The road ahead, we know, will be arduous and uncertain, but the goal has been set. We will walk it with hope and confidence. On that journey, the United Nations, the international community and the peoples of the world can count on Portugal.
