We live in a turbulent, volatile world that is going through unprecedented and extremely difficult times with tremendous challenges. Those challenges include armed conflicts, tensions in every corner of the globe, crises in multilateral institutions and the international system, a siege on the values of democracy by the twin threats of populism and authoritarianism, risks of cyberwarfare and the inappropriate application of artificial intelligence, the brutal inequity in the distribution of wealth, and climate change, which is endangering our very existence. Those are just some of the immense problems we are facing. I am afraid that I have not come here today to make a speech that will make us feel good, but rather one that will elicit the discomfort and concern that we should be feeling in the face of what is happening. I think that we must be honest and admit that we are failing — all of us — in building a better world. However, if there is a time and a place to debate and propose the crucial decisions that can change the course of humankind, it is the General Assembly. And thanks to the delicate situation we are living in, it is our duty to do so.
The good news is that not all is lost. As a great military hero and statesman of my country, Bernardino Caballero, said, “The future is the child of the present”. That means that we can have a better destiny if we act here and now. Through that, even with the discouragements that can bring many of us to despair, we can contemplate the bright horizons of the future — but only if we can earn the respect and esteem of future generations, as Caballero crucially added. That is, we simply want to be worthy of the high positions that we occupy today by tackling our problems with clarity, firmness and courage instead of sweeping them under the rug. Despite the difficult reality we live in, I remain optimistic. I do not fear the future, because I trust in the capacity of human beings to overcome challenges. However, it is imperative, indeed obligatory, that we redefine how multilateral institutions function and promote changes to them, such as the elimination of the veto in the Security Council. We need to build frameworks that promote equitable and sustainable development, in which all countries, regardless of their size or power, can benefit equally from global advances. That is the only way that we can fulfil the promises that this forum represents and earn the respect and esteem of future generations.
The maintenance of peace should be the fundamental pillar of multilateralism. Today’s reality paints a sad picture, however. The 20 or so international armed conflicts and more than 110 active internal conflicts around the world show us that the institutions created to preserve peace have not been able to fulfil their mission. War continues to be a plague that is suffocating humankind. That scourge tears apart the social fabric, annihilating communities and leaving a legacy of immeasurable suffering. Each life lost is a testimony to our collective failure to fulfil the most basic of our responsibilities — maintaining peace and protecting human dignity.
The history of my nation is living testimony to the cruelty and immense suffering that wars bring. During the War of the Triple Alliance, Paraguay endured a conflict of extermination that sadly foreshadowed the genocides of the twentieth century. As another great Paraguayan, Manuel Gondra, once said, Paraguay is a small but proud country, and that is the only reason it survived that bloody war. However, Paraguay knows that the price of war is very high, and that is why we understand better than anyone not only the calamity of war, but also what it means for a small country to be invaded or attacked by more powerful countries. That is why we express our most sincere solidarity with all the victims of armed conflicts, whether internal or international. We reaffirm our firm and determined commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes, and we advocate the non-use of force as a means of resolving disagreements between nations or peoples, without exception. In that context, we reiterate our firm support for Ukraine and its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We underline the urgency of finding diplomatic solutions that can lead to a fair, comprehensive and lasting peace, with the aim of ending the conflict and ensuring stability in the region.
As we do about Ukraine, we believe that conflicts must be resolved through dialogue and diplomacy, always seeking solutions that respect the fundamental rights of all parties involved. That belief also guides our position in the face of the growing crisis in the Middle East. Our relationship with the State of Israel is founded on solid pillars, such as faith and hope. That is why Paraguay has been one of the countries that has stood most firmly by Israel following the grotesque, targeted terrorist attack by Hamas on 7 October 2023. Today Paraguay reaffirms its recognition of Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself. We also reject any biased attempts to attribute equal responsibility to the democratically elected authorities in Israel and the leaders of the terrorist group Hamas. At the same time, we call urgently for the implementation of a solution that can alleviate the humanitarian situation, put an end to the violence, guarantee the immediate release of the hostages and promote a constructive dialogue that leads to lasting peace.
We are deeply concerned about the situation in Africa, where the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates that there are currently around 25 active conflicts, some long-standing and others emerging, all with devastating consequences for the lives and future of the inhabitants of the continent. We hope to see peace and stability restored in that region of the world. We have had enough of violence, war and mere words. As actors on the international stage, we must take firm and effective action.
Today I would also like to take a moment to address the dire humanitarian situation in Haiti, which is a clear example of the shortcomings of multilateralism. Despite numerous international efforts and interventions, the global cooperation efforts have failed to translate into the sustainable peace, governance and security that the Haitian people so need and deserve. Today gangs control much of Port-au-Prince and have plunged the country into a spiral of violence that multilateral mechanisms have been unable to de-escalate effectively. Added to that is a catastrophic humanitarian reality — more than 5 million Haitians are food-insecure and facing a resurgence of diseases such as cholera. Although multiple promises of aid have been made, inadequate financial resources and logistical difficulties have prevented the arrival of timely and sufficient humanitarian assistance. There is a worrying dissonance between what the international community promises and what actually gets done on the ground. We will stand by the Haitian people in every effort to help that brother country.
My country, like many others present today, has had a past of authoritarianism and dictatorships. That is why today we Paraguayans value the ideals of democracy and the rule of law more than anyone. We can speak with authority. Our country existed for a long time in the shadow of dictatorship, exile and expulsion. However, today our reality is different and vibrant. Paraguay has been reaffirming its democratic vocation through free and transparent elections for more than three decades. Never before have we had so many years of democracy, and I dare to say to the usual doomsayers and pessimists that despite shadows, these years have been my country’s happiest.
We Paraguayans may not agree on many things, but we do agree that there is no way to live together other than through democracy and the rule of law. Democracy is simply non-negotiable. That is why I want to condemn loudly and firmly what is happening to our Venezuelan brothers and sisters right now. I reiterate Paraguay’s position on the electoral process in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which ended on 28 July. The process ignored the will of the Venezuelan people and was marked by serious acts by the regime that resulted in persecutions and arbitrary arrests of the main opposition actors. The deterioration of democracy in Venezuela is clear, along with systematic violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms. Added to that are actions contrary to international law, especially with regard to diplomatic relations and the right to asylum. We reiterate our support for the democratic forces in Venezuela that are fighting authoritarianism and for a return to a system that is truly democratic rather than a mere facade.
One of the most important criticisms of global multilateralism is the idea of the equal inclusion of all nations. The concept of “one nation, one vote” often becomes a hollow one if smaller nations are forced to compromise their self-determination in exchange for not being left out of large international markets. Nevertheless, we recognize that regional cooperation remains a vital path to physical and economic integration. The fight to overcome our challenges is impossible without a convergence of the wills of neighbouring countries. In that regard, regional cooperation is the only viable alternative that allows us to work together and design national policies in coordination with other nations.
It is in that spirit of cooperation and strengthening of regional institutions that Paraguay has decided to submit the candidature of its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Rubén Ramírez Lezcano, for the General Secretariat of the Organization of American States (OAS). We are convinced that his leadership will contribute significantly to revitalizing the OAS and promoting a more inclusive and efficient multilateralism that meets the challenges of the present and focuses on the well-being of all the peoples of the hemisphere.
As part of our commitment to a more inclusive multilateralism that leaves no nation behind, today, Paraguay reiterates its unwavering support for those countries that, despite their outstanding global contribution, are still excluded from important international forums like this one. Paraguay not only recognizes, but also deeply values the international collaboration of the Republic of China (Taiwan), a sister nation with which we have forged almost 70 years of solid and meaningful friendship. That friendship is based on the shared values of democracy, the rule of law and free trade. It is a genuine friendship, forged in the adversity of being two geographically small countries in proximity to great Powers. Our fighting spirit, however, is far from small.
At this General Assembly session, we renew our strong support for Taiwan to be an integral part of the United Nations system. We believe that its exclusion is an injustice that we cannot overlook because the values that we share and its contribution to the international community deserve the same recognition as that of any other nation present here. If there is a country that should be part of the United Nations system today and is not yet doing so, that country is Taiwan. Today, we come not only to denounce that injustice, but to raise our voice firmly to alert the international community to the threat to Taiwan’s integrity and to the legitimate right of self-determination of peoples. I underscore the importance of peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait. In a world full of tensions, in which conflicts are constantly at risk of spillover, positive and peaceful interaction in that region is vital, not only for Asia’s security, but for global stability.
Just as we uphold the principles of peace, justice and international cooperation in all corners of the world, it is equally important to reaffirm our commitment to those values within our own borders. In my country, as I said earlier, we live in a vibrant and full democracy. With a republican system of balance of powers, although our political party has a majority in Congress, we maintain a dialogue with the opposition to carry out the major reforms that the country needs. We are convinced that democracy cannot be empty — it must have content, and, above all, it must achieve results. Here, economic development is crucial to ensure the future strength of democracy. Prosperity is the greatest enemy of crime, of division and of hopelessness. The most effective social policy, I always say, is economic prosperity. However, in order for that prosperity to reach everyone, it is necessary to invest in our human capital and create the conditions for families to get ahead through their own work.
Here, I would like to mention two of the programmes that my Government has been carrying out. The first is the Zero Hunger in Schools programme, a bid to eradicate 100 per cent of hunger in school-age children, born of the conviction that one cannot learn while hungry. The second is the Che Róga Porã programme, which is the first housing access policy in Paraguay aimed at the working class, with quotas for access to housing at the same price as rent, which will enable thousands of Paraguayan families to transform a monthly expense into a family asset. However, there is no development without security. In view of that, at both the national and the international levels, it is logical to adopt an comprehensive vision of security, with a sense of cooperation among the various national and international agencies. That is my vision as President of the Republic.
Finally, we will continue to focus on institutional frameworks and transparency as key conditions for development. Paraguay’s recent investment grade rating is a clear reflection of the continuous effort to strengthen our institutions, coupled with a tradition of economic stability that has been consolidated over several decades. Paraguay wants to be, can be and will be a genuine protagonist on the global stage. We are determined to take our place.
Paraguay is a country with abundant natural resources, valuable human capital and a strong focus on creating value chains that promote a green economy, based on the development of sustainable technologies. Our country sets an example in terms of clean and renewable energy production. Hydroelectric power generation is not only a national project, but also a joint initiative with our neighbours, one whose aim is to play a key role in building a more developed, more sustainable and emissions-free world. I firmly believe that Paraguay exemplifies the fact that economic development is entirely compatible with environmental sustainability.
Paraguay shares common challenges with other landlocked developing countries. Those challenges will be addressed in the new programme of action for landlocked developing countries, to be adopted in Botswana this December. Far from discouraging us, those challenges represent an opportunity for us. We are transforming our difficulties into strengths, taking advantage of our geographical location as a strategic position. Our position in the heart of South America drives us to be the engine of South American integration. With a clear vision, we are committed to becoming the region’s logistics hub through the Paraguay-Paraná Waterway and the South American Bi-Oceanic Corridor, which are key axes to revitalize and strengthen the Southern Common Market and Pacific Alliance blocs.
As we consolidate our geographical position as a hub of regional integration and logistics development, it is crucial that that vision of growth be backed by a strong investment in education. Paraguay’s success will depend on our ability to prepare future generations for the globalized and competitive world. Along with education, technology is a key tool for development and social inclusion. Our nations face many challenges. However, without a doubt, the question of the ethical application of artificial intelligence and of advances in technology in general stands out here. Moore’s Law postulates an exponential growth in the development of new technologies that require us to create new regulatory schemes to protect people, schemes capable of addressing a challenge that is approaching with a speed that is difficult to grasp. Those new techniques, such as sandboxes and co-regulation, must have as their ultimate goal the responsible use of emerging technologies and the equitable application thereof.
In Paraguay, we are deeply committed to preserving our cultural heritage. At the end of this year, we will host the nineteenth session of the Intergovernmental Committee for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, at which we hope that the Guarania will be recognized as an intangible cultural heritage of humanity. In addition, we reiterate our commitment to protecting the fundamental rights of all Paraguay’s citizens, the family, and human life beginning at conception, defending the traditional values that have made our nation great.
Despite my critical assessment, I must confess that I am an incurable optimist — I firmly believe that our future is bright and full of opportunity. I therefore believe in those luminous horizons of the future of which I spoke earlier. If we fight for a better present, we will have future days full of light and possibilities.
The defence of democratic values and respect for human rights must continue to be our guide. It is natural for us to have legitimate political differences, but there are principles on which there can be no compromise: democracy, the rule of law and unconditional respect for human rights are fundamental pillars. Although our political or ideological views may differ, that should not divide us or prevent us from moving forward in building cooperation based on solid foundations. If we maintain the ideals of cooperation, mutual respect, integration and fraternity among our peoples as a non-negotiable aim, I am convinced that we will see better days.
In conclusion and despite the tremendous challenges we are facing, I am convinced that, as William Faulkner once said, “man will not merely endure: he will prevail”.
