We will not leave. We will not leave. We will not leave. Palestine is our homeland, the land of our fathers and grandfathers, and it will remain ours. If anyone is to leave, it should be the usurping occupiers.
I come here today as, for almost a year now, my people have been subjected and are still being subjected to one of the most heinous crimes of our era, a comprehensive war crime and genocide committed by Israel, the occupying State, that has claimed the lives of more than 40,000 martyrs in Gaza alone. Thousands more remain under the rubble. More than 100,000 others have been injured to this day, and the situation is deteriorating. Hundreds of Palestinian families have been wiped out entirely, more than 100 families removed from the civil registry and no longer exist, and thousands have lost their lives due to the spread of diseases and epidemics and the lack of medicine and water. Moreover, more than 2 million Palestinians in Gaza have left their homes multiple times in search of safety from the systematic killings carried out by the Israeli occupation army. As the war of aggression drags on, it continues to kill dozens every day and injure many more of our afflicted people in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and Jerusalem.
I am not here to respond to the lies disseminated by the Israeli Prime Minister in his speech before the United States Congress in July, when he claimed that his army does not kill innocent civilians in Gaza. For God’s sake, who then has killed more than 15,000 children out of the 40,000 victims and an equal number of women and elderly persons from our people? And who is it that continues to kill them? For God’s sake, I demand an answer. That crime must stop and it must stop now. Israel must stop killing children and women and end the war of extermination. Weapons must stop being sent to Israel. This madness cannot continue.
The entire world bears responsibility for what is happening to our people in Gaza and the West Bank, which is exposed to continuous daily Israeli aggression and a vicious settlement campaign. Israel is building everywhere in Palestine, as if all of Palestine were its own. Settler gangs are waging a terrorist campaign sponsored and supported by the Israeli Government and the occupation army that is destroying hundreds of houses on Palestinian lands. In addition, Jerusalem, our eternal capital, is being exposed to a Judaization campaign and aggression against the city and its holy sites and landmarks, aimed at altering its historical and legal status.
We have recently heard a terrorist Israeli minister call for the building of a synagogue in Al-Aqsa Mosque. We must condemn the stance of that reckless minister and his ilk, who want to ignite a religious war that will burn everything in its path. Al-Aqsa Mosque and its surroundings are the exclusive property of Muslims, as endorsed by a 1930 resolution of the League of Nations. We will accept nothing less, no matter the circumstances.
We have repeatedly warned the Assembly that the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is on the verge of an eruption, and it is now erupting. That eruption occurred on 7 October last year and continues. Since day one, I have stressed the need for an immediate cessation of the war and condemned the killing of civilians, regardless of who they are, on what side they are on or what nation they belong to. I have demanded the release of prisoners and detainees on both sides. There is no need to detain children, women and the elderly. We have said that repeatedly to everyone who has detainees. I have called for immediate negotiations to implement the two-State solution on the basis of resolutions of international legitimacy.
Instead of listening to the voice of reason, the Israeli Government has exploited what happened to launch an all-out war of genocide on the Gaza Strip and committed and continues to commit war crimes, as recognized by the international community. Its crimes are war crimes. Again today, Israel has launched a new aggression against the Lebanese people, who are now also being subjected to a war of extermination. Israel must stop the war in both Lebanon and Palestine. We condemn that aggression and demand that it be stopped immediately.
Israel has reoccupied the entire Gaza Strip and destroyed it almost completely, making it uninhabitable. Most homes, buildings and health and educational facilities have been destroyed. Economic facilities, roads, churches, mosques, water and electricity stations, wastewater treatment — anyone who had been to Gaza and knew it before would not recognize it today. Seventy-five per cent of everything in Gaza is completely destroyed.
If Israel believes that it can avoid accountability and punishment for those crimes, it is delusional. The international community must immediately impose sanctions on Israel. The massacres, crimes and genocide that Israel has committed against our people since its establishment in 1948 to this day will not go unpunished, nor will it expire with the passage of time. Rights will never be lost so long as those who claim them remain.
Despite our urgent and repeated demands, the world has not succeeded in forcing Israel, the rogue State, to stop the war of genocide and its war crimes against innocent civilians. We regret that the United States Administration, the largest democracy in the world, has three times blocked Security Council draft resolutions calling on Israel to cease fighting. The United States alone stood up and said, “the fighting continues”. It did so by resorting to the veto, and on top of that it provided Israel with the deadly weapons it used to kill thousands of civilians, innocent children and women, which further encouraged Israel to pursue its aggression. So long as the United States supports it, why not keep going, since it is already the aggressor?
The United States was also the only member of the Security Council that voted against granting the State of Palestine full membership of the United Nations. We do not deserve full membership in the eyes of the United States, so it used the veto. I do not understand how the United States insists on opposing our people and depriving them of their legitimate rights to freedom and independence like the rest of the peoples of the world. They are 194 countries, and we are no less than them.
Israel, which refuses to implement the United Nations resolutions, is not worthy of membership of our international Organization. The Permanent Representative of Israel to the Organization has said that the very Headquarters of the United Nations, where we are sitting at this very moment, must be wiped off the face of the Earth. That country does not deserve to be a Member of the Organization. From the outset, it has failed to meet the conditions for membership, as it was required. In 1949, when it submitted its application for membership of the United Nations, the United Nations imposed two conditions. It was required to accept and implement resolution 181 (III), the partition resolution, and resolution 194 (III), on the return of refugees. So long as those two conditions were unmet, Israel would not be accepted as a Member of the United Nations. Moshe Sharett, the Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs at the time, wrote a pledge that he and Israel were committed to implementing the two resolutions, yet from 1949 until today nothing has happened. We will submit a request to the General Assembly on that issue to the effect that if they return, we will return, and if they do not back down, we will do more.
I take this opportunity to praise the State Member of the United Nations that voted by a majority of more than two-thirds in favour of resolution 78/78, submitted by the State of Palestine, which was supported by a large number of friendly and sisterly countries, to endorse the historic advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice, issued on 19 July 2024, to end the illegal Israeli occupation of the State of Palestine within a period of 12 months. For the very first time, there is a specific time frame. We demand the implementation of that particular requirement, including the immediate cessation of annexation and settlement activities, the dismantling of existing settlements and the removal of settlers from Palestinian lands. We have 600,000 settlers living on our land. Why do they not stay on their own?
We must redress the damage and compensate the Palestinians for what they have suffered as a result of the illegal policies and practices of the occupation and many other issues raised in the Court’s advisory opinion. We want what the International Court of Justice requires and what the world has recognized and accepted in the General Assembly by a large majority of well over two-thirds. Israel must be made to implement it. We count greatly on that resolution, which embodies the international will, the principles of international law and the mechanisms adopted in that regard to ensure implementation. We hope that, of the thousands of resolutions adopted with respect to the Palestinian people since 1948, not one of which has been implemented, this one will be implemented.
I also feel grateful today as I see this great shift in the positions of the State Member of the United Nations towards support for the Palestinian right to obtain an independent State and to recognize and grant it full membership of the international Organization, like the rest of the peoples of the world who yearn for freedom and love peace. On behalf of the Palestinian people, I thank them for that support of truth and justice to achieve peace in our region, and I call on them to apply the provisions of international law, in line with their responsibilities and sovereignty. We do not ask for more than they can do. We ask every State to lend us its support within the scope of its responsibility and sovereignty.
I also express our gratitude and appreciation for the demonstrations against the war of extermination on Gaza and in support of the Palestinian cause that have been held all over the world, including the in the United States. I acknowledge that the American people are marching in the streets. We are grateful to them and thankful for the European activists who come to Palestine and risk their lives under Israeli aggression. In that context, I offer my condolences for the martyred Turkish-American citizen Aisha Noor Ezgi, who was killed in cold blood by the occupation army. The Palestinian people will not forget their honourable stand , and we will remember them with pride and honour on the day when the occupation ends and our people gain freedom and independence.
There has been much talk lately about the day after. What do we want to do on the day after? What is our policy for the day after the end of the war in the Gaza Strip? I take this opportunity today to present our vision of what will need to be done immediately on the day after the war ends. This is our proposal to the General Assembly. Members can accept it, amend it or change it — we are ready for all of that.
First, we need a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire in the Gaza Strip and an end to the military aggressions and attacks of the terrorist settlers in the West Bank and East Jerusalem first.
Second, relief assistance must be delivered urgently, systematically and in sufficient quantities, because there is nothing in Gaza. They need everything, from water to anything else, because there is nothing. They need everything. Humanitarian assistance must be delivered throughout Gaza.
Third, Israel must withdraw fully from the Gaza Strip. We reject the establishment of buffer zones or the confiscation of any part of Gaza. The entire Gaza Strip is only 7 kilometres wide and 40 kilometres long, and Israel wants to cut it up. It wants a piece from here and a piece from there. We will not allow a single centimetre of Gaza to be taken. We demand an end to forced displacement inside or outside the Gaza Strip, the return of the displaced to their areas of residence and the provision of shelter for them. Netanyahu’s goal is to remove the people of the West Bank and the people of the Gaza Strip, some to Egypt and some to Jordan. We refuse. The Palestinian people refuse. I thank the Jordanian and Egyptian Governments for insisting that they will allow no displacement of Palestinians from their lands.
Fourth, we demand protection for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and humanitarian organizations from Israel’s arbitrary acts, and the provision of political and material support to the Agency so that it can perform its role and provide services to Palestinian refugees until they return to their homes. UNRWA was established to do its duty until the refugees return, and every day Israel finds an excuse to convince others that UNRWA’s mission must be ended.
Fifth, we demand international protection for Palestinians on the lands of their occupied State. We need protection because we are not fighting Israel, we cannot fight Israel and we do not have the desire to fight, but we need to protect our children, families and women. We want international protection.
Sixth, the State of Palestine must assume its responsibilities in the Gaza Strip and exercise its full jurisdiction over it, including the border crossings, most notably the Rafah international border between Egypt and Palestine, as part of a comprehensive plan. Such an arrangement existed earlier between us and Egypt, and it must go back to the way it was.
Seventh, and within the framework of the comprehensive national reform process that we are carrying out — which most countries have reviewed, supported, endorsed and thanked the Palestinian Government for, and which we will pursue to the very end — we are rebuilding the infrastructure and State institutions that have been destroyed by Israel, reviving the economy, seeking sustainable development, reconstructing the Gaza Strip and holding the State of Israel responsible for it all.
Eighth, the authority of the State of Palestine, the Palestinian Government and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, must be extended throughout all Palestinian territories in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as stipulated under international legitimacy. We do not demand more, but we do not accept any less than the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem. We do no ask for more but will not accept anything less. That is in preparation for the general elections. We are ready to hold elections and have been ready in the past, but Israel has refused to allow us to hold them in Jerusalem. If that were to change, however, we are ready to hold elections and form a Palestinian Government pursuant to their results.
Ninth, we will continue to mobilize the greatest possible international support for the State of Palestine to obtain full membership of the United Nations as soon as possible. What do we lack so that we can sit here in the General Assembly? What do we lack to be on the same footing as the 193 official Member States of the United Nations? We have the land, we have the power, we have the people, we have the culture, we have the science, we have everything. We ask for the international community’s assistance.
Tenth, we require the full implementation of the General Assembly resolution on the legal advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice to which we referred earlier. That will end the occupation within 12 months, pursuant to the Assembly resolution and pursuant to the advisory opinion.
Eleventh, an international peace conference must be held within a year under the auspices of the United Nations to implement the two-State solution and resolve all the problems pending between us and Israel. By the way, we recognize the State of Israel, but Israel does not recognize us. We want a solution that protects both countries, the State of Palestine and the State of Israel, live side-by-side in security, stability and peace.
Twelfth, we call for the establishment of an international peacekeeping force, under a resolution of the Security Council, between the State of Palestine and Israel to ensure the security of the two States. We call for guarantees for the security of the two States.
Those are the elements of our vision for today and for the day after the war ends in the State of Palestine in general. I call on the General Assembly to adopt the plan and to provide all means necessary to make it a success.
I announced several weeks ago that I had decided to lead a Palestinian leadership delegation to the Gaza Strip to stand with our people, who have been exhausted by the Israeli war of genocide. I call on Members to support that decision by adopting a resolution in that regard and pressuring the occupation Government not to obstruct our endeavour. On this occasion, I welcome any country and any party that wants to join our visit. We will be happy to go together to Gaza to see all the effects of the tragedies that have occurred.
I salute our heroic people, who have given all that is precious for the sake of Palestine in selfless Gaza, the steadfast West Bank and our crown jewel and capital, Jerusalem. We salute our people in the refugee camps and diaspora, and our valiant 6,000 prisoners in Israeli prisons. Israel arrests whomever it wants and violates the human dignity of its prisoners on a daily basis. Palestine will be free in spite of those who do not want it to be. Our people will continue their lives in the land of their fathers and grandfathers, as they have done for more than 6,000 years, and pursue their legitimate struggle for independence. The occupation will inevitably, inevitably, inevitably come to an end.
