At the outset, I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and to wish him every success in carrying out his tasks. I also want to express my appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for his efforts in presiding over the Assembly at its previous session. And I commend the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his important role in strengthening our Organization and fulfilling its noble goals.
The blatant assault afflicting the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip today is the most barbaric, heinous and extensive aggression we have seen in violation of human values and international conventions and norms. It does not fall within the common concept of war as understood in international relations but is rather a crime of genocide, in which the world’s most sophisticated weapons are being used against a people besieged in an open-air detention camp where there is no escape from the barrage of aerial bombing. The resolutions, condemnations and reports have been exhausted, and now nothing remains except the undeterred, ongoing, premeditated, overt crimes being committed against children, women and the elderly.
We are opposed to violence and the targeting of innocent civilians by any party, but after a year of this war, with everything that has happened and continues to happen, in the context it is no longer tenable to talk about Israel’s right to defend itself without being complicit in justifying its crimes. It is no longer plausible for any officials to claim that they do not know about Israel’s bombings of schools and hospitals and its weaponization of access to food and medicine. The facts and the reports issued by international organizations are well known, in addition to the published and publicly expressed intentions of Israeli leaders. The failure to intervene to stop the aggression is therefore a major scandal.
Every year I begin my address from this rostrum by talking about the Palestinian question, the absence of justice, the perils of believing that it can be neglected and the illusion that peace can be made without a just solution. I have done it every year, at a time when discussion of the Palestinian question has vanished from the speeches of representatives of major Powers around the world. There are those who are tempted by the possibility either of marginalizing the question in order to get rid of the burden of it or of letting it vanish without resolving it — but the Palestinian question is resistant to marginalization, because it is an issue that is about an indigenous people on their own land who are being subjected to a settler-colonial occupation. That occupation has taken the form of an apartheid system in the twenty-first century. Can that be ignored?
The Palestinian question will continue to hang over us until we see one of two things happen — either the occupation comes to an end or the Palestinian people disappear. And it seems that there are some in Israel who entertain hopes for the elimination of the Palestinian people. The ongoing Israeli aggression for almost the whole of the past year is simply a result of a lack of genuine political will, a deliberate international failure to resolve the Palestinian question with a just solution and the occupying Israeli authorities’ insistence on imposing a fait accompli on the Palestinians and the world, using every kind of force. The ongoing brutal war has inflicted a death blow on international legitimacy and done serious damage to the credibility of the post-Second World War concepts on which the international community was founded.
As if the dire consequences of Israel’s approach, which we can see with our own eyes, were not enough to prove that ignoring a just solution is conducive to disaster, to our disbelief we have discovered that some are still trying to find innovative ways to run Gaza after the war, with or without an authority, and to do so solely on the basis of security considerations. Of course, what that implies is the security of the occupation, not the security of those who are actually languishing under that occupation. It is that same mindset that has led from one disaster to another. It is an approach that wants to tailor the entire region to fit Israel, while also looking for ways to avoid ending the occupation and to impose the rule of one people over another by force. Is it reasonable that even in discussing what will happen after this disaster is over, the major Powers with the ability to influence the course of events are unable to agree on the necessity of stopping the war and immediately pivoting towards a just solution, rather than working on innovative ways to evade it?
Ending the occupation and allowing the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-determination are neither favours nor gifts to be granted by anyone. Unfortunately, the Security Council has failed to implement its resolution 2735 (2024), on a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, and has refrained from granting the State of Palestine full membership status in the United Nations, despite the General Assembly’s adoption in May of resolution ES-10/23, in support of Palestine’s request. Granting the State of Palestine full United Nations membership neither establishes its sovereignty nor ends the occupation, but it at least sends a message to the far-right Government challenging international legitimacy that force does not eliminate rights. Claiming that such a step harms the peace process is simply papering over the cracks, because there is no Israeli partner for peace during the current Government’s tenure. There is no peace process taking place — only a genocide. In that regard, we very much appreciate the position taken by countries that have recognized the State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders.
The continuing humanitarian tragedy of our brother Palestinian people for more than seven and a half decades is a shameful stain on the conscience of the international community and its institutions. There is no point in talking about peace and security and stability in the Middle East — or indeed the rest of the world — if it is not backed by concrete steps leading to an immediate ceasefire and an end to the Israeli occupation of all Arab territories. It is no secret that we are facing a humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza and the other Palestinian territories, which are being subjected to coordinated attacks by the occupation army and settlers in an attempt to enforce their plans to expand the settlements, annex the West Bank and Judaize Jerusalem.
The international community bears responsibility for the consequences of what is happening to the Palestinian people, who are being subjected to an ongoing genocidal war that has so far resulted in the deaths of more than 41,000 martyrs, not counting those missing under the rubble. Among those who have lost their lives are 17,000 children and 11,000 women. Some 100,000 people have been injured, including thousands who have been left with disabilities, and millions have been forcibly displaced several times. In addition, the infrastructure of hospitals, schools and other buildings, including mosques and churches, has been completely destroyed. An entire society is being ruined in the course of the genocide against segments of the Palestinian people, the Gazan Palestinian community, which retained its composure and achieved remarkable levels of development amid a stifling siege for more than 17 years.
The State of Qatar has chosen to undertake mediation efforts in an endeavour to stop the aggression against Gaza and secure the release of prisoners and detainees. The mediation is going on amid a fierce war and in complex circumstances, during which one party would have no hesitation in assassinating the political counterparts with whom it is negotiating. In that regard I would like to point to the assassination of Ismail Haniyeh, who was not only the political leader of Hamas but also the first elected Palestinian Prime Minister, a fact that many people pretend they have forgotten. For us, mediation and humanitarian work constitute a strategic political choice at the regional and international levels. It is a humanitarian duty before it is a political one, but we are not interested in being boastful in that regard. In partnership with Egypt and the United States, our mediation efforts culminated in a humanitarian agreement last November. That resulted in a temporary ceasefire in the Gaza Strip and the release of 240 Palestinian prisoners and 109 detainees in Gaza, as well as an increase in the flow of relief shipments.
We have also provided humanitarian support to the civilian population in the Gaza Strip. We have contributed to evacuating the wounded and sick, supported humanitarian initiatives to deliver aid through all accessible routes and increased our support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. The services of that irreplaceable international Agency are indispensable, yet it has been subjected to defamation for political purposes related to the Israeli Government’s desire to eliminate the refugee crisis without resolving the Palestine question. Qatar will spare no effort to provide humanitarian assistance in various forms to our brother people of Palestine until the crisis is resolved. Despite the daunting challenges, attempts at obstruction and aspersions that we have been subjected to, we will continue our efforts to resolve the conflict through peaceful means, while recognizing that no conflicts lack forces interested in their continuation when they are sceptical about any mediation, regardless of the intentions.
We will continue to make every effort with our partners until a permanent ceasefire is achieved and the release of all prisoners and detainees is secured. We will not rest on the path towards a just solution that is in in accordance with the resolutions of international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, enabling the Palestinian people to obtain all their legitimate rights, foremost among them an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital along the 1967 borders. The establishment of an independent Palestinian State through a just and permanent solution is in the interests of both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We will achieve that goal only with a serious partner who is aware of the importance of renouncing discord and ending the occupation and all forms of aggression, so that together we can reach the peace in the Middle East that we desire.
Besides committing a major crime by rigging wireless communication devices and exploding them simultaneously among thousands of people with total disregard for their identity or location, Israel is currently waging a war on Lebanon, and no one knows the extent to which that war could escalate. We have repeatedly warned against that should the brutal war on Gaza not come to an end. That systematic destructive war must stop. The choice lies with Israel, as its leaders are well aware. They know that it will bring neither security nor peace to northern Israel or Lebanon, and that the key to security rests on a just peace. They must stop the aggression against Gaza and the war on Lebanon.
In our brother country of Yemen, we look forward to preserving the 2022 truce and proceeding from it towards a comprehensive ceasefire. We hope to resolve the crisis, ensure Yemen’s unity and achieve the aspirations of its brotherly people through negotiations among the Yemeni parties, based on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and implementation mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Regarding the crisis in Syria, the position of the State of Qatar has been clear since the beginning. Qatar will prioritize the interests of our brother people of Syria in the hope that the parties and countries involved will be convinced of the need for dialogue and understanding to end the crisis, in accordance with the communiqué of the Geneva II Conference on Syria and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), and in such a way that the aspirations of the Syrian people are met and Syria’s unity, sovereignty and independence are preserved.
Regarding the problem in the Sudan, we urge all Sudanese parties to stop the fighting and stress our support for all regional and international efforts to end the crisis in a way that can ensure the unity of State institutions and the country’s sovereignty and stability.
In Libya we support the current political trajectory and ensuring the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. We urge all the parties to use dialogue and work to overcome their differences in order to carry out the comprehensive national reconciliation process. That includes preserving the progress and gains that have been made on the security, political and economic fronts, as well as unifying State institutions. Arab countries cannot achieve security and stability without the existence of firmly established States that are capable of legislating, enforcing laws and developing and implementing national policies. No State can be firmly established or stable in the presence of armed factions that are not under its control. Such matters are self-evident and unquestionable.
The war between Russia and Ukraine has caused great human suffering, with repercussions for Europe and the world at large. We reiterate our call on all parties to implement the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and adhere to the rules of international law in the quest for a peaceful settlement, which is the only possible solution. In that context, and based on our firm belief in the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, we made a tangible contribution over the past year, as Qatari mediation led to a prisoner swap between the United States and Venezuela. Dozens of Ukrainian children were also reunited with their families after being separated by the war.
Finally, we reaffirm that the State of Qatar will spare no effort in working with its international partners and the United Nations to firmly consolidate the pillars of peace, security, sustainable development, human rights and the rule of law at every level and to address global challenges in order to achieve a better future for all.
