A few days ago, this building hosted a forum called the Summit of the Future. Russia was supportive of the Secretary-General’s idea to convene it, since the crisis of our Organization is deepening and something needs to be done about it. We devoted our efforts to preparing the Summit. However, we were realistic in our expectations. Many ambitious events in the modern history of the United Nations have ended up with loud declarations that were soon forgotten.
For instance, in 2000 the Millenium Summit proclaimed the goal to “free our peoples from the scourge of war”. A little more than two years later, the United States of America, at the head of the coalition of the willing, invaded Iraq — which has yet to recover from the devastating consequences of that affair — under a ridiculous pretext and without the mandate of the Security Council. The 2005 World Summit declared its commitment to establishing a just peace in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That sacred commitment did not prevent the United States and its allies from emboldening Georgia’s then-leader Mikheil Saakashvili to launch an armed aggression against the people of South Ossetia and Russian peacekeepers in 2008. Three years later, NATO orchestrated a military intervention in Libya that destroyed its statehood and undermined the stability of neighbouring countries.
In 2015, the United Nations Summit on Sustainable Development adopted grandiose plans to fight poverty and inequality. In the end, they turned out to be empty promises in the face of the unwillingness of Western countries to abandon their neocolonial practice of siphoning off the riches of the world for their own benefit. One can simply look at the statistics to see how many promises to fund development in the global South and transfer environmentally friendly technologies have actually been kept.
The current Secretary-General, António Guterres, like Kofi Annan and Ban Ki-moon before him, has put forward an initiative under the slogan of a new start for global cooperation. That is a wonderful idea. Who could disagree? But what global cooperation is there to talk about when the West has trampled all the unshakeable values of the globalization that we were told about for so many years, from every rostrum, with assurances, trying to convince us that they would give everyone equal access to the benefits of modern civilization? Where is the inviolability of property, the presumption of innocence, freedom of expression, access to information or fair competition in markets under clear and constant rules? The Secretary-General speaks of global cooperation at the very moment when the countries of the West have unleashed a veritable war of sanctions against more than half, if not the majority, of the countries of the world and the United States dollar, promoted as an asset and a good for all humankind, has been crudely turned into a weapon.
Cuba has been subject to a trade blockade for more than 60 years, while the overwhelming majority of members of the international community have called for it to be lifted. In its pursuit of the increasingly unattainable goal of maintaining its dominance, Washington has blocked the normal work of the World Trade Organization to settle disputes and reform of the Bretton Woods institutions, whose structure has long ceased to reflect the real balance of power in the world economy and finance. The West also seeks to turn the United Nations into a tool to promote its own selfish ends. The Summit of the Future showed that the number of attempts to obscure the intergovernmental nature of the Organization has increased. The long-awaited changes in the way the Secretariat is staffed, with key positions de facto occupied and inherited by representatives of the Western minority, have been curtailed. When the Secretary-General calls for a new beginning for global cooperation, the Secretariat must promote unifying ideas a nd propose options for compromise, rather than find excuses to integrate pro-Western narratives into the work of the United Nations.
It is not late to breathe new life into the United Nations, but that can be achieved through the restoration of trust based on the Charter principle of the sovereign equality of all States, rather than through out-of-touch summits and declarations. However, trust is instead being undermined, including by actions of the West — in circumvention of the United Nations — to create subordinate, narrow formats to resolve crucial issues, such as control over the Internet or determination of legal frameworks to use artificial intelligence technologies. Those issues touch upon the future of all humankind and must be considered on a universal basis, without discrimination or aspirations to achieve unilateral benefits. Thus, everything has to be agreed on a fair basis involving all United Nations Members, and not how the so-called Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) was drafted, without a single plenary round of talks attended by all countries. Instead, the work was done under the control of Western manipulators. As a result, the Pact merely swelled the ranks of declarations written in beautiful English before it was even born. Such, regrettably, is the fate of the outcomes of global summits of this kind.
The situation is no better when it comes to implementing the binding resolutions of the Security Council. It is enough to mention the sabotage of the resolutions on the Kosovo settlement and the Dayton Accords on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The most egregious example is the almost 80-year-long stalling tactics with regard to consensus resolutions on the establishment of an independent Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security with Israel.
The acts of terrorism to which Israelis fell victim on 7 October 2023 cannot be justified, but all who are still capable of compassion resent the fact that the October tragedy is being used to justify a massive collective punishment of the Palestinians, which has turned out to be an unprecedented humanitarian disaster. The murder of Palestinian civilians by United States weapons must stop. The delivery of humanitarian cargoes to the enclave must be ensured, the restoration of infrastructure must be arranged and, most importantly, the implementation of the legitimate right of self-determination of the Palestinians must be guaranteed. They must be allowed to establish a territorially integral and viable State within the borders of 1967, with its capital in East Jerusalem — not in words but in deeds on the ground.
Another blatant example of the use of terrorist methods to achieve political goals is the brutal attack on Lebanon, in which civilian technology was turned into a deadly weapon. That crime must be investigated immediately. It is already impossible to ignore the numerous publications in the media, including in Europe and the United States, proving the various levels of Washington’s involvement and, at the very least, its awareness of the preparation of a terrorist attack. We understand that the Americans always deny everything and do their best to bury the emerging facts, just as they did in response to irrefutable evidence of their involvement in terrorist acts against the Nord Stream pipelines. Those pipelines, by the way, were a great example of the global cooperation of which the Secretary-General dreams. Their destruction has undermined the competitiveness of the European Union in the global economy for many years, to the benefit of the United States. The West is to blame for concealing the truth about the organizers of many other heinous crimes, including a bloody provocation in Bucha, a city in the Kyiv region, in April 2022, and a series of poisonings of Russian citizens in the United Kingdom and Germany.
The Secretariat cannot remain aloof from efforts to establish the truth in situations that directly affect global security. It must act impartially, in strict accordance with Article 100 of the Charter, and avoid the temptation to play into the hands of certain States, especially those that openly call not for cooperation but for the world to be divided into either a blossoming garden or a jungle, or into those who dine at the democratic table and those who find themselves on the menu.
The track record of those who demand that the rest of the world play by their rules should not be forgotten. The invasion of Afghanistan and the inglorious 20-year presence of a well-known coalition there was accompanied by the emergence of Al-Qaeda. The creation of the Islamic State was a direct result of the aggression against Iraq. The start of the war in Syria gave birth to Jabhat Al-Nusra — now Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham — and the destruction of Libya opened the floodgates to terrorism in the Sahara-Sahel region and to millions of illegal immigrants in Europe. We urge all those who care about the future of their countries and people to be extremely cautious about the new plots of the inventors of those very rules. Political assassinations, such as that which took place yesterday in Beirut and which have become almost common practice, are of the utmost concern.
The tragic and unacceptable developments in the Arab-Israeli conflict in Yemen, in the waters of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, in the Sudan and in other danger zones in Africa reflect the undeniable fact that security can either be equal and indivisible for all, or there will be no security for anyone. For years, Russia has been trying to make Washington, London and Brussels, overwhelmed by their own complexes of exclusivity and impunity, understand that seemingly simple truth in the context of European security. Although they initially promised not to expand NATO, and in 1999 and 2010 signed official documents at Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe summits, pledging not to ensure their own security at the expense of others, in fact the North Atlantic Alliance has been carrying out geopolitical and military expansion in Europe for three decades, trying to establish positions in the Transcaucasian region and Central Asia and creating direct threats to the security of our country. The same thing is happening in the Asia-Pacific region, where NATO’s infrastructure is creeping in and narrow military and political blocs are being created, undermining the inclusive security architecture under the auspices of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in order to contain the People’s Republic of China and Russia.
At the same time, the West not only fails to seek the global cooperation called for by our Secretary-General, but in its doctrinal documents openly and harshly accuses Russia, China, Belarus, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Iran of creating threats to its dominance. The goal of the strategic defeat of Russia is declared therein, just as London and Washington did in May 1945, when, even before the end of the Second World War, they developed Operation Unthinkable to destroy the Soviet Union. That was kept a deep secret, but today’s Anglo-Saxon strategists do not hide their intentions. True, they expect to defeat Russia through the illegitimate neo-Nazi Kyiv regime, but they are preparing to drag Europe into that suicidal affair. I will not dwell on the futility and danger of the very idea of trying to fight to victory against a nuclear Power such as Russia. Equally meaningless are the chants of Kyiv’s Western masters that the infamous peace formula is the only viable basis for peace talks. In defending this doomed ultimatum, the West unreservedly invokes the Charter of the United Nations and demands that Ukraine’s territorial integrity be guaranteed.
I would remind colleagues in the Secretariat, among others, that the Charter is not only about territorial integrity. The very first Chapter of the Charter proclaims the obligation to respect the principle of equality and self-determination of peoples. That served as the international legal basis for the process of decolonization, which is still ongoing, despite the opposition of the French, the British and other former colonial Powers. In 1970, the General Assembly unanimously decided in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations (resolution 2625 (XXV) that everyone must respect the territorial integrity of those States whose Governments respect the right of peoples to self-determination and thus represent the entire population living in the territory concerned. I stress that this was a unanimous decision of the General Assembly after many years of complicated discussions. There is no need to prove that the Ukrainian neo-Nazis who seized power in Kyiv in February 2014 after a bloody coup supported by the United States and its allies have never represented and do not represent the Russian population of Crimea, the Donbas and Novorossiya.
Western leaders, who are obsessed with the topic of human rights at every given opportunity, pointedly remain silent about those rights in relation to the racist actions of their Kyiv clients. In the light of that forgetfulness, I recall another requirement of the very first Article of the United Nations Charter — to respect the rights and fundamental freedoms of any person regardless of their race, gender, language and religion. The rights of Russians and people associated with the Russian culture have been methodically eradicated following the coup in Kyiv. The Russian language in Ukraine has been legally prohibited in all spheres — education, media, the arts, culture and even everyday life. Another law banning the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church was adopted recently. Those gross violations of the rights of Russians enshrined in the United Nations Charter, along with threats to the security of Russia and all Europe coming from the Kyiv regime and all those dragging it into NATO, are prime causes of the current Ukrainian crisis. The special military operation that Russia is carrying out to protect its own security and the present and the future of the people on their indigenous land is aimed at eliminating them.
We value the genuine aspiration of the entire range of our partners to promote mediation initiatives for the very best of reasons. We respect their constructive commitment to results, as opposed to the dead-end peace formula of Volodymyr Zelenskyy. We encourage our friends to take the aforementioned facts behind the real causes of the current situation fully into consideration in their further efforts. No just peace on the basis of the United Nations Charter is possible unless they are eliminated. A realistic settlement plan was set forth by President Vladimir Putin on 14 June, when he once again convincingly demonstrated Russia’s goodwill effort to achieve negotiated agreements, whose prospects were overturned by Kyiv and its patrons following the 2014 coup and the breakdown of the 2015 Minsk Agreements and 2022 Istanbul Agreements.
The unprecedented level of hypocrisy and aggressiveness of the Western policy against Russia not only negates the idea of global cooperation promoted by the Secretary-General, but even more so blocks the functioning of the entire global governance system, including the Security Council. That is not our choice, and we are not to be blamed for the consequences of such a dangerous course, but everyone will feel its high cost if the West does not stop.
It is obvious to the world majority that confrontation and hegemonism do not solve a single global problem. They merely artificially restrain the impartial process of forming a multipolar world order based on the equality of rights of nations big and small, respect for the value of the human person, the equality of men and women and the right of peoples to determine their own fate themselves — all of which are cited in the United Nations Charter, as is the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States, whose restatement, to the shame of United Nations Members, was blocked by the United States and its satellites at the Summit of the Future during the adoption of the corresponding Pact.
Addressing the participants of the fourth Eurasian Women’s Forum in St Petersburg on 18 September, President Vladimir Putin stressed the need to pool efforts in the name of sustainable development and universal, equal and indivisible security. It is possible to resolve the most complicated issues facing all humankind only through cooperation, with due account of each other’s interests. The West must understand that and break its neocolonial habits. The global South and East are ever more loudly claiming their right to full participation in decision-making processes across the spectrum of the international agenda, which is more relevant still as the West systemically destroys the globalization model it created.
The role of intergovernmental associations in Asia, Africa and Latin America is growing. They include, among others, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the African Union, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the League of Arab States, the Eurasian Economic Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Those regional integration structures are building contacts both among themselves and with the global association of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa known as BRICS, which allows the harmonizing of approaches to agree on the mechanisms of mutually beneficial cooperation and development beyond the control of negative internal impacts and dictates.
All those impartial processes will have to be taken into account in the work of the Group of 20, where the Group of Seven can no longer call the shots. Ways of ensuring security in different regions will have to be reconsidered, drawing lessons from the bitter experience of the functioning of the NATO-oriented or so-called Euro-Atlantic security models, which the West has exploited for its expansionist intentions.
Russia has launched an initiative to create an inclusive architecture of equal and indivisible security in Eurasia, that — I stress — would be open to all States and organizations of our common continent that are ready to work together in the search for universally acceptable solutions, using the interconnectedness and natural competitive advantages of the unified Eurasian space. An international conference will be devoted to that topic in Minsk, starting on 31 October. We are not fencing off dialogue with the West. In July, at Russia’s suggestion, the Security Council held open debates on building a fairer and more stable world order. We believe that it is important to pursue the discussion, both in the United Nations and in other forums.
A more equitable world order unconditionally presupposes increased representation of the global South in the Security Council. We reaffirm our position in support of the candidacies of Brazil and India, provided that a positive decision is reached in the framework of the well-known initiatives of the African Union. At the same time, of course, there can be no talk of additional seats for Western countries, which are already excessively overrepresented in the Security Council.
May 2025 will mark the eightieth anniversary of the victory in the Second World War, in which tens of millions of people, including 27 million citizens from all the nations of the Soviet Union, fell victim to the genocidal policy of the Third Reich. Such crimes have no statute of limitations, as there is no moral justification for those who try to whitewash Nazi executioners, collaborators and their current successors in Ukraine, the Baltic States, Canada and other countries.
The world is once again facing massive challenges that require united efforts rather than confrontation and the desire for global domination. Russia will always be on the side of collective work, truth and law, peace and cooperation in the interests of reviving the ideals laid down by the founding fathers. That is the aim of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations, established at the initiative of Venezuela. Its objectives and principles remain fully relevant. The main thing is that everyone without exception respect those principles, not selectively as if choosing from a menu but in their entirety and interconnectedness, including the principle of the sovereign equality of States. Only then, while working for the honest balance of the legitimate national interests of all countries, can we bring to life the purpose of the United Nations, as stated in the Charter, “to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations”.
