At the outset, I would like to congratulate Ambassador Philemon Yang on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and to assure him of Rwanda’s full support.
As we conclude the general debate, unity has been a central theme throughout this year’s high-level week, and rightly so. Rwanda is of the view that in today’s increasingly fractured world, unity is central to addressing pressing issues, most of which transcend borders and national interests. Contemporary challenges require ambitious and coordinated action that paves the way for equal access to opportunity, ensures sustainable development and contributes to global peace and security.
As we approach the second half of this decade, solidarity is key to achieving targets under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals. Rwanda strongly endorses the Secretary-General’s stimulus package as a timely and necessary intervention to address the pressing challenges facing the global economy and the most vulnerable populations. The package represents a crucial step towards creating a more equitable and resilient global financial system, particularly as developing nations continue to grapple with the impacts of climate change and widening inequality.
For too long, African countries and other marginalized regions have borne the brunt of global economic shocks without sufficient support from the international community. The stimulus package not only acknowledges those disparities but also seeks to correct them through targeted financial aid, debt relief and sustainable development initiatives. By addressing structural inequalities and ensuring that resources reach those who need them most, the Secretary-General’s proposal is a call to action for global solidarity. It will empower nations to rebuild more sustainably, with renewed focus on green energy, digital transformation and poverty eradication. Rwanda believes that now is the time for bold multilateral action, and the package is an essential step towards securing a more just inclusive and sustainable future for all.
Rwanda commends the efforts of the Secretary-General and Member States in convening the Summit of the Future. The Summit and the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) are crucial steps in boosting action to protect the interests of present and future generations.
Rwanda knows first-hand what division and fracture can do to a society, let alone a community of nations. In the aftermath of the genocide against the Tutsi in 1994, we Rwandans found ourselves at a crossroads, where we chose unity over division for our own survival. That choice was not an easy one, but it was the right one and has defined Rwanda’s post-genocide nation-building ever since. The world now stands at a similar crossroads, with a choice to make by choosing unity for the collective good. That is what the Kwibuka Flame of Hope monument, recently built in the gardens of United Nations Headquarters in memory of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi, stands to remind the world.
Reports show that Africa is set to be the engine of future global growth in the decades to come. With the world’s fastest growing middle class, estimated to encompass 1.1 billion people by 2060, Africa will take the centre stage of global affairs. However, that feat cannot be achieved without the adequate tools to both finance the decarbonization of our economies and mitigate the effects of climate change. Building resilient economies in the global South is an urgent priority that goes hand-in-hand with increased solidarity from those who are most responsible for carbon pollution. The pay-to-pollute model is not a viable option; solidarity and investment are. Consequently, advanced economies should reduce their emissions faster and invest more in Africa’s autonomous transition.
In a few weeks, the world will gather in Baku for the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The international community should seize that opportunity to pledge more green investments in Africa. Additionally, Rwanda encourages nations to join hands and conclude an ambitious global plastics treaty, based on a comprehensive approach that addresses the full life cycle of plastics at the upcoming fifth session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee in Busan. We have a historic opportunity to demonstrate our collective resolve to end plastics pollution for the benefit of current and future generations. Rwanda stands ready to play a positive role in that direction.
The year 2024 marks two decades since Rwanda’s first deployment of troops under the United Nations peacekeeping banner. Today, Rwanda is among the top contributors, with deployment in missions across Africa, and yet insecurity in our region has reached unprecedented levels. That is evidenced by the rising threat of radicalized insurgency in the southern part of the continent, terrorism in the Sahel and the presence of State-supported genocide militias right by our border. Now more than ever, cosmetic fixes must be avoided in favour of long-term solutions addressing the root causes of those conflicts. Security is not achieved only by silencing the guns; it is also achieved by building a fit-for-purpose global governance system capable of quickly adapting to crises.
The reform of the multilateral financial institutions is complementary to the reform of the Security Council, as both are crucial to creating a more equitable and effective global governance system. The financial institutions that shape global economic policies and the Security Council, which ensures peace and security, must evolve to better address the diverse needs of today’s world. Without reform, those bodies risk perpetuating inequalities, particularly for Africa, which has historically been underrepresented in decision-making processes. Reforming both the financial institutions and the Security Council is vital to ensuring fair representation, fostering trust among nations and effectively responding to the pressing challenges of the modern era, such as economic instability, climate change and conflict. In that regard, Rwanda fully supports the reform of the Security Council to enhance its effectiveness and efficiency. Such reforms are necessary to address the long-standing injustices faced by Africa, ensuring that the Council becomes more responsive to contemporary global challenges and dynamics. It is only through those changes that we can build a system grounded in equitable rules, unity and solidarity.
As we conclude this session of the General Assembly, let us remember that history will judge us not by the challenges we face, but by how we respond to them. The reforms we seek are not just necessary but inevitable to ensure a future grounded in justice, equity and solidarity. Rwanda stands related to work with all nations and believes that, together, we can build the world we want, one where no nation or continent is left behind. Let us seize this moment for the future, for the future of humankind depends on it.
