I would like to begin by congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and by thanking Mr. Dennis Francis for his efforts during his presidency at the previous session.
I also take this opportunity to offer our deepest thanks and appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres for his tireless efforts to achieve the principles and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.
Since its participation in the founding of the Organization, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has been keen to make every possible effort to translate the Charter of the United Nations into a tangible reality by consolidating respect for international law, maintaining international peace and security and supporting channels of multilateral international action in all fields. In that context, the Kingdom participated effectively in drafting the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which was adopted by world leaders this week. The Kingdom believes that the Pact and the Summit for the Future in general offer an opportunity to reaffirm common principles, enhance cooperation to confront challenges, achieve security and peace and support sustainable development for future generations. The Kingdom seeks to activate the role of international financial institutions to ensure continued economic recovery and reduce risks.
Our world today is witnessing many crises that have been exacerbated by our efforts to merely manage them without seeking practical solutions to address them, due to the laxity of effective international efforts and selectivity in applying international law and international humanitarian law. That has led to a growth in violence and conflicts, threatening the principles of international legitimacy. We must therefore adhere to the principles and foundations established by the United Nations Charter and work together and seriously to focus on long-term peaceful solutions that ensure the protection of civilians, end conflict and wars and provide security and development regionally and internationally.
In the light of the ongoing tensions among countries, the Kingdom warns against political polarization in the international community and seeks to enhance dialogue, understanding and rapprochement among countries, which will enhance global security and peace. In that regard, the Kingdom reiterates its rejection and condemnation of all the heinous crimes committed by Israel against the brotherly Palestinian people. The recent crimes committed against defenceless civilians in the Gaza Strip are only one chapter in the decades-long suffering of that brotherly people. Since last year, the brutal Israeli practices have claimed the lives of tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians, most of them women and children, as a result of systematic bombing, killing, destruction and starvation, amid a major humanitarian disaster that is deteriorating day after day.
Based on our categorical rejection of that bitter reality and the need to take action to end it, the Kingdom hosted the Joint Arab Islamic Extraordinary Summit in Riyadh on 11 November 2023, attended by the Heads of State and Government of the States members of the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The Summit issued decisions that represent the will of all Arab and Islamic peoples and called for an end to the bloodshed, the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance and the realization of the legitimate demands of the brotherly Palestinian people for the recovery of their occupied lands and the establishment of their independent State. The Kingdom chaired the Ministerial Committee that was tasked by the Summit with conducting visits to a number of countries in order to urge the international community to shoulder its responsibilities, stop the Israeli aggression and protect civilians.
The Kingdom welcomes the adoption by the General Assembly on 10 May of resolution ES-10/23, stating that the State of Palestine is eligible for full membership of the United Nations. It also welcomes the positive decision taken by the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of Spain, the Republic of Ireland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Republic of Armenia to recognize the sisterly State of Palestine and calls on other countries to consider bilateral recognition. In recognition of our shared responsibility to take serious action towards realizing the recognition of an independent Palestinian State, the Kingdom has announced, with its partners, the members of the Joint Arab Islamic Ministerial Committee, the Kingdom of Norway and the European Union, the launch of an international coalition to implement the two-State solution. We call on all States to join us in that initiative.
The Kingdom has provided more than $5 billion in aid to the brotherly Palestinian people. Since the beginning of the current crisis in the Gaza Strip, the Kingdom has provided relief and humanitarian aid through the King Salman Center for Relief and Humanitarian Aid, amounting to nearly $185 million. Agreements have been signed with several United Nations organizations and international humanitarian organizations to implement humanitarian projects, amounting to more than $106 million. The Kingdom will continue to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to enable it to provide its relief services, food and medicine and to meet the humanitarian needs of our Palestinian refugee brothers. The Kingdom’s total support to UNRWA amounts to more than $1 billion.
The Kingdom welcomes the advisory opinion issued by the International Court of Justice regarding the policies and practices of Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories and its confirmation of the illegality of the Israeli presence on the occupied Palestinian territories for the past 75 years. The Kingdom stresses the need to take practical and credible steps to reach a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian issue, based on the decisions of international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative and in a way that guarantees the right of the brotherly Palestinian people to establish their independent State on the borders of 1967, with its capital in East Jerusalem.
The lack of accountability and punishment, despite Israel’s ongoing violations of international law and international humanitarian law, encourages it to escalate, as we have seen in its increasing attacks and violations against Lebanon. That escalation will not achieve security and stability for any party. It portends serious consequences and the expansion of violence and wars and further threatens the security and stability of the region. The Kingdom therefore stresses the need to preserve Lebanon’s stability and respect its sovereignty, in accordance with international law and relevant Security Council resolutions. We join in international efforts aimed at establishing an immediate ceasefire to allow for a sustainable diplomatic settlement. We also call on all parties to exercise wisdom and the utmost degree of self-control to spare the region and its peoples from the dangers of wars and their tragedies.
The Kingdom has taken clear steps to ensure calm and development at the regional level. It has reached an agreement with the Islamic Republic of Iran to resume diplomatic relations between our two countries on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and adherence to the charters of the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which will help to consolidate security and stability and advance the progress of regional development and prosperity. We look forward to Iran’s cooperation with the international community regarding its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.
The Kingdom has also resumed its diplomatic relations with the Syrian Arab Republic in order to enhance cooperation and coordination between our two brotherly countries on common issues. The Kingdom is convinced that resolving the Syrian crisis will contribute to the development and stability of the region, while emphasizing the importance of preserving Syria’s unity, security, stability and territorial integrity in a way that achieves the good of its brotherly people.
The Kingdom looks forward to the restoration of peace in brotherly Yemen and supports all efforts aimed at resolving the crisis and alleviating the humanitarian suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people and achieving a political solution to restore security and stability to Yemen and the region. We reaffirm our initiative to end the war in Yemen and reach a comprehensive political solution. In the light of the tensions in the Red Sea region, affecting the security and safety of international navigation corridors and global trade, the Kingdom renews its call on the parties to exercise wisdom, avoid escalation and enhance joint efforts to maintain the security and stability of the Red Sea region, where freedom of maritime navigation is an international demand that affects the interests of the entire world.
Regarding the Sudan, the Kingdom affirms its firm position in favour of preserving that country’s security, safety and stability, strengthening the cohesion of the State and its institutions and preventing its collapse, and supporting it in confronting the developments and repercussions of the current crisis. The Kingdom hosted the Sudanese peace talks in Jeddah governorate to emphasize the need for calm, an end to military operations and the delivery of humanitarian and relief aid. Work is under way to launch the third round of Jeddah talks to that end.
The Kingdom wishes to see the security, stability and territorial integrity of Afghanistan restored. Afghanistan cannot live in isolation from the regional and international communities, especially in the light of the danger posed by the continued presence of terrorist groups there. We therefore emphasize the importance of limiting the deterioration of the humanitarian, security and economic conditions that give extremist groups and militias the opportunity to strengthen their presence in Afghanistan. We emphasize that economic and development stability can be achieved only in an environment of political and social stability.
With regard to the Russian-Ukrainian crisis, the Kingdom renews its call for an end to the crisis and its negative effects and repercussions on the security and stability of the world. His Royal Highness the Crown Prince and Prime Minister has made goodwill efforts to secure the release of a number of prisoners of various nationalities. Last year, the Kingdom hosted a meeting of national security advisors and representatives of more than 40 countries and international organizations. The Kingdom stresses the need to make every possible effort to end the crisis, resolve differences peacefully, ensure respect for the principles of international law and strive to preserve the security and interests of all. The Kingdom is ready to pursue its mediation efforts between the two parties to the crisis.
The Kingdom, through its Vision 2030, seeks to meet the aspirations of future generations, empower women and young people, develop creativity and innovation, consolidate the values of tolerance and build bridges of communication with the world. Through its development approach, it aims to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable renaissance, focusing on the human person in a way that preserves its rights, enhances its dignity and meets its aspirations.
In the field of energy, the Kingdom is committed to achieving a balance between the three pillars of energy security, providing affordable energy for all and reducing the effects of climate change. The Kingdom is committed to maintaining the stability, reliability and sustainability of global oil markets and to meeting needs in a way that enhances the availability of energy, ease of access to it and the security and safety of supplies so as to ensure a prosperous global economy that benefits producers and consumers. The Kingdom is committed to contributing to reducing the effects of climate change by adopting a comprehensive approach to energy transitions based on a logical, organized and fair basis, so that the goals of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change can be achieved by taking advantage of all technologies that contribute to addressing greenhouse gas emissions from all sources, including oil and gas, which will remain a pivotal part of the international energy mix for decades to come.
In addition to the Kingdom’s possession of technologies that have enabled it to be among those countries with the lowest carbon and methane emissions intensity index in oil and gas operations, it continues to develop other low-emission energy products. In that regard, the Kingdom is working to build a carbon capture, transport and storage complex in Jubail Industrial City, with a capture and storage capacity of up to 9 million tons of carbon dioxide annually by 2027 and a maximum capacity of 44 million tons annually by 2035.
The Kingdom supports the Sustainable Development Goals and international cooperation to confront the challenges of climate change. At the Saudi-African Summit in Riyadh, the Kingdom announced the allocation of approximately $50 billion to support those efforts and launched several pioneering initiatives based on the circular carbon economy approach, such as the Saudi Green Initiative and the Middle East Green Initiative, in addition to investing in the best technologies, reducing carbon intensity, increasing renewable energy sources in the optimal energy mix for electricity production, and producing clean hydrogen. We are determined to be a major producer and exporter of all these to the world.
The Kingdom also supports multiple projects that focus on rationalizing consumption, raising energy efficiency, preserving wildlife and sustaining water wealth and marine life. In that regard, in 2024 the Kingdom hosted World Environment Day, affiliated with the United Nations Environment Programme, and will host the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification at the end of this year to confirm its commitment to protecting the environment and resisting and combating drought and desertification. The Kingdom will also host the eleventh World Water Forum 2027, and in that regard I note the announcement of His Royal Highness the Crown Prince and Prime Minister concerning the establishment of a world water organization in September last year to develop and integrate the efforts of countries and organizations to address water challenges in a comprehensive manner.
The Kingdom is working towards a world free of nuclear weapons and a stable Middle East. It stresses the need for all countries to commit to maintaining the non-proliferation system, while preserving the right of countries to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The Kingdom supports the efforts made to confront terrorist organizations and highlights the importance of strengthening joint action and continuing coordination among international partners to confront the threat posed by those groups to our countries and peoples. We emphasize the need to exert greater efforts to limit the impact of the propaganda campaigns launched by terrorist groups. We stress the importance of continuing our work to combat the financing of terrorism and of the need to exchange information related to this matter.
The international community has tasked the Kingdom with hosting the international Expo 2030. The Expo’s slogan — “The Era of Change: Together for a Foresighted Tomorrow” — embodies its aspiration to anticipate the future of the planet and useful technological developments, with a focus on the Sustainable Development Goals. The Expo will offer the opportunity to enhance work on projects with a global impact and cooperation in seeking global solutions through innovation, sustainability and inclusiveness in its commitment to developing countries. The Kingdom expresses its thanks and appreciation to the countries that supported its hosting of this global event.
In conclusion, we look forward to our efforts contributing to conveying our message, values and principles to the world in an atmosphere of respect and partnership to build a better future for all humankind.
