I address the General Assembly today on behalf of the people and the Government of the Sudan.
I congratulate the President of the Assembly at its current session and his team, wishing them success in addressing the increasing threats to security and peace, which have put our Organization to the test, undermine the principles of freedom, peace and justice, and violate the national law. The Sudan believes in and supports the role of the United Nations and all initiatives to promote the reform and development of the work of its organs, especially the Security Council, with a view to strengthening multilateralism and collective security, protecting human rights and confronting the challenges of climate change and ethnically and ideologically motivated terrorism.
The Sudan welcomes the theme of this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development, and human dignity”. It also welcomes the priorities set out by the President of Assembly and believes in the need to implement the outcomes of the Summit of the Future, especially with respect to reforming the United Nations and the Security Council, allowing them to put an end to the protracted crises that are threatening international peace and to achieve consensus and harmony among nations and peoples; the increasing number of unilateral measures taken outside the framework of the United Nations, in complete violation of the Charter and international law; and the use of political and economic coercion to achieve political goals. All of those factors contribute significantly to instability in the security, political and economic spheres and to fuelling wars. Moreover, selectivity and double standards have become the dominant features of international relations.
The Sudan is facing very serious challenges as a result of a war launched by a group that has long rebelled against the State, with local and regional political and logistical support. All of us have witnessed the crimes, atrocities and violations committed by that rebel group against the Sudanese people and the Sudanese State. The war began with an attempt to seize power by force of arms and soon grew into an all-out war against the Sudanese people and their State. Countless crimes have been committed, including ethnic cleansing, forced displacement and genocide by the Rapid Support Forces, which should be classified as a terrorist group. Unfortunately, that militia continues to commit its crimes with the support and assistance of countries of the region, which provide them with money and mercenaries for their own political and economic benefit, in a blatant challenge to international law and will.
The crimes of that terrorist group have even extended to the headquarters of diplomatic missions and organizations and their property. Even the United Nations offices and property in the Sudan have been targeted. The Dagalo family has continued to defy international laws and obligations with impunity, refuses to comply with the Jeddah Declaration of Commitment to Protect the Civilians of Sudan, and rejects Security Council resolutions on the arms embargo imposed on Darfur. Their crimes of ethnic cleansing in Darfur continue. Their latest challenge to those resolutions is their non-compliance with Security Council resolution 2736 (2024), concerning El Fasher, the capital of North Darfur state.
That begs the question of why the international system has not taken decisive and deterrent action against that group and its supporters, despite everything I have mentioned and all its crimes against humanity, war crimes and failures to implement the resolutions of the Security Council and regional organizations. That is all the more reason to call for the reform of the Security Council so that double standards, impunity and lack of accountability do not become key characteristics of the Organization.
The devastating aggression led by the Rapid Support Forces, with the support of States of our region, which have provided them with financial support and facilitated the recruitment and importation of mercenaries and weapons, has resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands and the displacement of millions of Sudanese from their homeland as they flee the armed groups to seek refuge in various regions. Millions more Sudanese now live in peace in other parts of the country. The systematic attacks led by the militias increase the suffering of our citizens everywhere and every day.
As a result, we have been seeking solutions to the situation. The Jeddah Declaration of May 2023 should have been enough to end the war and return life to normal, but the political and regional Powers supporting the war have a different take on the situation, leading to the circumstances we are enduring today. In order to alleviate the suffering of our fellow Sudanese and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid, we have opened our borders and airports and lifted all restrictions and procedures that could disrupt or hinder the entry of aid to those in need.
The Government of the Sudan is determined to facilitate humanitarian work and protect humanitarian and medical convoys and crews, and affirms its full commitment to international humanitarian law and measures to protect civilians. Protecting civilians is our responsibility, especially when women and children in areas controlled by the militia are subjected to all kinds of violations and have even been sold in the markets. The humanitarian crisis affecting a large portion of our population, owing to the aggression of the Dagalo militia, requires the concerted efforts of the international community and organizations to fulfil the declared international obligations to provide the required and necessary aid to millions of those fleeing, displaced persons and refugees. For our part, we have done and will do everything possible to deliver aid to those in need. In that regard, we thank all the neighbouring countries that have received those fleeing, displaced persons and refugees and the countries and organizations that have provided assistance to the Sudanese people.
We are facing a great challenge, and the United Nations must assume its responsibilities for protecting developing countries from the avarice of countries that still believe that they can control peoples’ resources through the use of force and money. We tell them that the will of our people is stronger than all that and that it will ultimately prevail. Many crises, including that in the Sudan, are the product of double standards, political coercion, economic blackmail and the inability of the international system entrusted with maintaining international peace and security to deter those who defy the will of the international community.
Some marketplace incentives serve the interests of certain parties or States, and those methods have become unacceptable and ineffective for our developing countries, where artificial conflicts are growing in number. Therefore, national ownership of solutions is the best way to address them. Since the start of the crisis, we in the Sudan have sought to end the war and to spare the country the destructive attacks of the Dagalo militia on the Sudanese people and the country. We have thus engaged in many constructive initiatives, and we still harbour hopes of ending the conflict so as to guarantee the dignity of the people and the sovereignty of our State. We are working to ensure that the war will not resume and that accountability will be uphold. The road map for ending the war in the Sudan is clear.
First, combat operations must end, and that will happen only when the rebel militia withdraw from the areas they currently occupy and from which people have been displaced. The militias must lay down their weapons so that citizens can return to their homes, where it is easier for assistance to reach them. That will also facilitate the reopening of roads and airports and the resumption of production. Secondly, the end of the hostilities must be followed by a comprehensive political process that restores the path of the democratic political transition and puts in place sustainable solutions with national ownership that will prevent the recurrence of wars and military coups.
I confirm that the Sudanese Armed Forces, which is one of the oldest institutions of the State, is fully professional, non-politicized and fully committed to the democratic transition process and the right of the Sudanese people to choose who governs them. Therefore, it is keen to fulfil the first commitment it made after the glorious December Revolution in 2019 to hand over power to any consensus or elected Government. It will never accept the return of the previous regime, which was rejected by the people, and affirms its commitment to contributing positively to facilitating the transition to civilian rule. The Government of the Sudan also reiterates its commitment to seeking peace with all groups that still bear arms and willing to respect the 2020 Juba Agreement for Peace.
Throughout the war, the Sudanese Armed Forces have remained committed to international humanitarian law, the Geneva Conventions and its Protocols, and efforts to protect civilians and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to various regions of the Sudan. We in the Government of the Sudan are ready to engage in any initiative that could help to end the war, so long as it upholds national ownership and ends the control and occupation of our territories by the militia. We are also in favour of all initiatives that guarantee the dignity of the Sudanese people and the unity and sovereignty of the State over its lands as a first and necessary step towards restoring the democratic path. It is unacceptable for the Government and he people of the Sudan to engage with any country that has supported the war and participated in the killing and displacement the Sudanese, whether by supplying weapons or facilitating their delivery, or by provided political or any other kind of support for the aggression against the Sudanese State and people. I confirm that we are proceeding to defeat the aggressors no matter what support, assistance and political cover they enjoy.
I thank the countries, organizations and human rights and volunteer groups that have sought to paint an accurate picture of what is happening in the Sudan. I welcome the outcomes of the Manama summit, the Great Lakes summit in Rwanda and the meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in Yaoundé. I commend them for their decision to describe what is happening as a rebellion by a militia against the Sudanese State. We want the United Nations to rein in the armed groups and deter any future attempt to act in similar fashion in other countries. We must rightly portray the Rapid Support Forces as an armed force that has rebelled against the State and committed crimes that necessitate their classification as a terrorist group. That is one of the most important duties of the Organization.
Before I conclude, the Government of the Sudan affirms its firm position on the Palestinian cause and the right of the Palestinian people to establish their independent State within the borders of 1967. We call for the immediate end to the hostilities in Gaza and Lebanon, and we recommend that Palestine’s be granted full membership of the Organization.
In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks and those of the people and the Government of the Sudan to all those who have stood by us in this ordeal. Millions of Sudanese still need their help. May the will of the Sudanese people prevail.
