It is an honour and a privilege to address the General Assembly. I bring warm greetings from the Government and people of Solomon Islands.
Solomon Islands extends our warm and sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on your election as President of the Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. You may rest assured of Solomon Islands support during your tenure in office. We thank His Excellency Ambassador Dennis Francis for his sterling leadership in the previous session.
The theme of this session calls for global solidarity and collective actions for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations, leaving no one behind. We live in a fast-changing environment that is shifting towards a multipolar world. We must seek a multilateral, rules-based world order that is equal, inclusive and free from power politics and geopolitical tensions. We also seek an international system that respects international law and recognizes the special situation of small island developing States (SIDS).
The growing economic inequality between the haves and the have-nots, climate emergencies around the world, poverty, hunger, disease, social injustices and racism, hegemonic interests, militarization and nuclear posturing are dividing the world and creating tensions and fear. The rich and powerful are spending some $2.4 trillion on arms that would be better invested in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in fighting the biggest enemy of humankind, which is climate change.
It is our shared and solemn duty to commit to bold collective action in protecting the health of our planet. We must hold ourselves to account and secure the future of our people by unlocking the opportunities of prosperity and planting the seeds of peace. In that connection, Solomon Islands calls for the reform of the Bretton Woods institutions to ensure that they are fair and democratic and represent the rise of the global South, including the multidimensional and complex challenges facing the small island developing States.
We call for global and regional financial institutions to scale up grant support for small island developing States. We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) stimulus of $500 billion annually to support developing countries and to get the SDGs back on track. In the same vein, we re-echo our call for the establishment of a permanent seat for SIDS in decision-making within the international financial architecture to ensure inclusivity in the spirit of leaving no one behind. The slogan used by the disability rights activist James Charlton speaks to that call very clearly: “Nothing about us without us”.
Solomon Islands was elected this year to serve on the Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project Services. We are indeed grateful for the support given and will work to position those United Nations programmes and agencies closer to those that need it most.
As the third-largest Pacific country, and with least developed country (LDC) status, Solomon Islands calls for an enhanced United Nations country presence. In the past 46 years, the United Nations has conducted its relations with Solomon Islands from a distance. In living up to our Charter obligations, Solomon Islands formalized relations this week with the Republics of Rwanda and Colombia. As a testament of our foreign policy of being a friend to all and enemy to none, we uphold respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all 133 countries we have formalized relationships with, including respect for the one-China principle in the case of the People’s Republic of China.
On Security council reforms, the world continues to witness the limits and failures of the Security Council to prevent deadly conflicts with the use of the veto. Fostering international peace demands an expanded Council, with equitable geographical representation, that is democratic and equipped with revised working methods. We urge that, during this session, we shift into text-based negotiations and make the reform happen. Solomon Islands aspires to be a candidate for the regional seat of the Security Council in 2032. As a peace-loving country, we reiterate our standing position of condemning all wars around the world and call for a diplomatic solution.
On the conflict in Palestine, Solomon Islands condemns all the violence and carnage committed by all parties, including the terror attack on Israel by Hamas. The suffering and collective punishment of the Gaza population by Israel have claimed more than 41,000 Palestinian lives in less than a year. That is unacceptable. The disregard for international law and humanitarian law has seen the matter referred to the International Court of Justice. We hope that those with influence will do more for peace and not fan the flame of the expanding conflict into Lebanon. Solomon Islands reiterates its long-standing position on the Palestine conflict and supports the global push for a two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side-by-side with secured borders in a just, permanent and complete peace.
Colonialism has no place in this day and age. Solomon Islands supports the implementation of the United Nations Fourth International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. We also recognize the inalienable right of self-determination of all non-self-governing and trust territories, including New Caledonia and French Polynesia, to choose their political future under Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and resolution 1514 (XV). The recent brutal violence in New Caledonia calls for a new political solution in the spirit of 1998 Nouméa Accord. We call on the United Nations to do more to calm and stabilize the situation in New Caledonia. Solomon Islands welcomes the constructive discussion between France and the New Caledonia Government to facilitate a Pacific Islands Forum fact-finding mission to New Caledonia, of which Solomon Islands is a part.
As a large ocean State, 98 per cent of Solomon Islands territory is covered by the ocean. The Pacific occupies 20 per cent of the world’s surface and provides 1.5 million tons of annual catch of tuna, which is around one-third of the world’s supply. Our approach to the ocean is premised on achieving a healthy, resilient, secure and productive ocean that supports sustainable use and development for the benefit of the people of Solomon Islands, now and into the future.
As stated last year, Solomon Islands will be co-hosting the Honiara Summit on SDG 14.4, with the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency, the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the Ocean and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The Summit will examine the status of SDG 14.4 at the global, regional and national levels, share knowledge and experience on the management of tuna stocks, and provide policy and strategic actions that will feed into the third United Nations Ocean Conference in 2025 in France.
On the matter of pollution and waste management, Solomon Islands looks forward to the finalization of negotiations on the treaty to end plastic pollution, including in the marine environment in November. We have already banned single-use plastics. We are also reforming waste management in partnership with our friends Japan and Australia and the Asian Development Bank.
As a steward of the ocean, Solomon Islands values the work of the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf and will continue to address outstanding continental shelf claims. Solomon Islands upholds its obligations to the United Nation Convention on the Law of the Sea and will integrate the recently signed Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction into its domestic legislation.
In response to the discharge of treated radioactive contaminated water into the ocean by Japan, the lack of national and regional scientific knowledge and understanding of the intergenerational impact and transboundary nature of the discharge continues to cause uneasiness and anxiety for my country. United Nations specialized agencies, including the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), must continue to build bridges of trust with States and support their capacity to read and understand IAEA reports and monitor the discharge of treated radioactive contaminated water into the ocean.
Our concern is connected to the sad history of our region being used to test, store and dump nuclear weapons and wastes. Solomon Islands remains a nuclear-weapon-free State under the 1985 South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty. This week, we signed and ratified the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. That sent a message of peace to all our friends not to engage in military nuclear projects and to free the world of nuclear weapons.
Education empowers the nation, including my own. Let me thank Cuba for the training of Solomon Islands medical students. Cuba has done so despite enduring more than six decades of the United States of America economic, commercial and financial embargo, a relic of the past that should now be discarded. Once again, we call on our friend and partner the United States of America to end the embargo. The United Nations stands for good-neighbourly relations and peaceful coexistence. The world will benefit from improved relations between Cuba and the United States of America.
Following the conclusion of the Solomons International Assistance Force in August, our priority now is to strengthen our law enforcement capability and institutional capacities. We will work with all our partners to achieve that goal. We thank our partners, particularly Australia, for their ongoing support in that regard and appeal to the United Nations to provide space for Solomon Islands to participate in peacekeeping missions.
Solomon Islands welcome the power of South-South cooperation and acknowledges the People’s Republic of China’s various development initiatives — such as the Belt and Road Initiative, the Global Development Initiative, the Global Security Initiative and the Global Civilization Initiative — in supporting Solomon Islands development aspiration, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In education and health care, we once again thank China for its commitment to establishing an ocean research centre and acknowledge the ongoing construction of Solomon Islands National Referral Hospital Comprehensive Health Centre. We also welcome India’s pharmacopeial cooperation and Japan’s commitment to constructing a fisheries research centre in Solomon Islands.
On the international trade front, Solomon Islands acknowledges China as the first major economy to offer zero tariff treatment for 100 per cent tariff lines to all least developed countries. We call on all our partners to follow suit. China has become Solomon Islands largest infrastructure partner and is currently supporting Solomon Islands digital transformation with the ongoing installation of 161 communication towers across the country. Already, we are witnessing more of our rural population now connected to the digital age.
Our inter-island connectivity has been improved with the completion of two all-weather airfields and an international airport. We thank New Zealand and Australia for their support. We would also like to acknowledge Japan, the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank for their ongoing support in improving our infrastructure connectivity. Nevertheless, as a geographically fragmented country, we need more infrastructure to meaningfully deliver on our SDGs. Solomon Islands values the contribution of all our development partners and calls for partnerships that are country-owned, led and driven. We seek partnerships that are genuine, meaningful, durable and free from onerous conditions.
Climate change is no longer a threat but a crisis. Solomon Islands is located in a hotspot where the impact of climate change is three times the global average. Science tells us that we are on a 2.5°C trajectory. The Paris Agreement on Climate Change is failing humankind. We need a stronger legally binding framework that will put us on a 1.5°C pathway. The voluntary approach under the Paris Agreement has failed miserably. The changing narrative on climate change is unacceptable. Talk of ambitious climate action, survival or the construction of safe islands is replaced by discussions on sinking and migration. We need to give hope to our people on the front line of climate change. The Group of 20 is responsible for 80 per cent of global emissions; it must take a stronger leadership role in the fight against climate change.
In July, Solomon Islands presented its second Voluntary National Review at the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development. The report revealed uneven progress, but it has allowed the country to restrategize and prioritize four key interconnected and people-centred pillars, namely, economic transformation, good governance, national unity and stability, and human capital development. Our economic transformation agenda is centred on enhancing transport infrastructure connectivity, boosting investments in agriculture, fisheries and tourism, improving private sector investment environment for indigenous Solomon Islanders, and reducing the cost of doing business in my country. Over the past three months, the Government has been socializing those priorities through several targeted national forums, including with our development partners.
The Government is leading the preparation of our smooth transition strategy to graduate from LDC status. The strategy will look at what needs to be done not only before 2027 and but also in the following five to ten years, including the implementation of critical economic and social investments to prevent regression. We reaffirm our commitment to the implementation of the Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries and support the call for the General Assembly to review existing resolutions on smooth transition to ensure that the graduation framework is better, resilient, irreversible and fit for purpose.
Solomon Islands welcomes the adoption of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for Small Island Developing States, which offers immense opportunities to access adequate and affordable funds to drive economic growth and prosperity for small island developing States. Solomon Islands also welcomes the adoption of the multidimensional vulnerability index and we look forward to its early implementation.
In conclusion, Solomon Islands pledges our commitment to the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), a forward-looking framework that places the health of our planet, people, prosperity and peace at the centre of our agenda, supported by a reformed financing architecture that will turbocharge sustainable development and guarantee a better tomorrow for all that leaves no one behind.
