I congratulate His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session, and I express Sierra Leone’s support to him during his tenure. I extend my deep gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for his principled stewardship as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. I appreciate and thank His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his tireless efforts and global leadership.
More than 30 years ago, Sierra Leone was plunged into a decade-long brutal civil war. More than 50,000 people were killed, and millions fled their homes as refugees and internally displaced persons. The situation in Sierra Leone at that time was not unique. Conflicts existed in other parts of West Africa, in Africa and around the world. In Sierra Leone, however, we overcame our challenges with a common vision for peace through genuine dialogue, committed leadership and action. Notably, the hard-won peace we enjoy is not without its fragility, and we remain vigilant in safeguarding it. Sierra Leone’s peace journey exemplifies the values of ownership, engagement through dialogue and partnership, especially with the Economic Community of West African States, the United Nations and the broader international community, which yielded the peace dividend.
That story has shaped our engagement within the Security Council since the commencement of our second tenure in January. For almost nine months, Sierra Leone, as an elected member of the Security Council, has endeavoured to be a voice of reason and a bridge-builder with balance and objectivity. We will continue to promote respect for, and adherence to, international law and the Charter of the United Nations, ensure the protection of civilians, end impunity through accountability and foster dialogue for the peaceful settlement of disputes. Our commitment to those principles is even more imperative than ever, as we are confronted with conflicts of great magnitude in the Middle East, Africa, Asia and Europe. The need for a ceasefire in Gaza and the wider Middle East, as well as in the Sudan, the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ukraine, is not just pressing, but urgent. Immediate action is required to prevent the further loss of precious lives and human suffering. We need collective action to stop all conflicts and engage in meaningful dialogue so that the countries can move forward with their development agenda in peace, security and stability. As a country that has experienced the devastating consequences of armed conflict, Sierra Leone acknowledges that peace cannot be achieved in isolation. It requires inclusive political processes, economic development and respect for human rights. For the millions of civilians trapped in the ongoing armed conflicts, words of condemnation and empathy alone are not enough. It is imperative that we act together, as the United Nations, with a sustained commitment to end the cycle of violence and give innocent civilians the opportunity to enjoy lasting peace and prosperity.
In the Sahel and West Africa, the regional leadership has been hard at work to find urgent solutions to the numerous peace and security challenges, particularly to curb the spread of terrorism and violent extremism. I call on the international community to strengthen support for African-led peace initiatives and on the United Nations to play a more active role in addressing the root causes of conflicts. The safety and security of the people in the Sahel and parts of West Africa require a strong commitment from all relevant actors to engage in political dialogue and diplomacy, actively, to ensure that we provide countries on the front line, especially Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, with the vital support they need. Commitment to political transitions is necessary, but it should never be at the expense of the safety of vulnerable civilians. There can be commitment to and action on both. I have called for meaningful dialogue and have led by example by visiting the Head of State of Burkina Faso before Sierra Leone assumed the presidency of the Security Council in August. We need to build bridges, and that requires the international community’s commitment to working with the regions to implement dialogue-based, region-led and region-owned solutions.
Our current term on the Security Council has reinforced the view that there is an urgent need for reform. Nearly 80 years after its creation, the Security Council remains stuck in time. Its imbalanced composition is unjust and at odds with current realities, undermining its legitimacy and effectiveness. Unfortunately, Africa remains the unquestionable victim in all of this. Without structural change, the Security Council’s effective performance and legitimacy remain questionable.
In a historic and successful debate (see S/PV.9702), which I presided over during Sierra Leone’s presidency of the Security Council, in August, on addressing the historical injustice and enhancing Africa’s effective representation in the Security Council, I spoke as a representative of a continent that has long been underrepresented in the decision-making processes that shape our world on matters of peace and security. That debate had indisputable resonance: first, that the historical injustice being perpetrated against Africa must be rectified; secondly, that Africa must be treated as a special case; and, thirdly, that it must be prioritized in the reform process. In expressing appreciation for the active and supportive engagement by the many interests and regional groups as well as the Member States invited to the debate, we made the facts and issues clear to all. Africa has long been marginalized in global decision-making processes, and its voices are often drowned out. The legacy of colonialism, economic exploitation and political marginalization has left deep scars on the African continent, thereby affecting its development, stability and influence in international affairs. That results in the lack of meaningful representation on issues that directly affect the continent, such as conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping operations and sustainable development.
Addressing contemporary global security challenges requires the collective wisdom and cooperation of all nations, not just the privileged few or the most militarily or economically powerful. We argue that the equitable representation of Africa will better equip the United Nations to tackle global challenges and foster a more just, fair and peaceful world. As the coordinator of African Union Committee of Ten Heads of State and Government on the reform of the United Nations Security Council, Sierra Leone remains fully committed to promoting, defending and soliciting support for the common African position, as espoused in the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration. Africa, therefore, demands no less than two permanent seats, with all rights and privileges of permanent members, including the right to the veto, and two additional seats in the non-permanent category of the Security Council.
Sierra Leone welcomes the consensus that has emerged from the General Assembly intergovernmental negotiations, as reflected in the Pact for the Future, to
“Redress the historical injustice against Africa as a priority and, while treating
Africa as a special case, improve the representation of the underrepresented and unrepresented regions and groups” (resolution 79/1, para. 67 (a)).
Let us work together to redress this historical injustice and re-create a Security Council that truly reflects the diversity of the world that we live in today. As I stated in the Security Council debate, the time for half-hearted measures and incremental progress is over (see S/PV.9702). Africa’s voice must be heard, and its demands for justice and equity must be met now.
The Summit of the Future, for Sierra Leone, is about delivering peace, human rights and the dividends of democracy for everyone, everywhere, now. Accordingly, my Government has laid out a strategic vision for Sierra Leone, as captured in Sierra Leone’s medium-term national development plan 2024–2030 — a framework for delivering socioeconomic development and prosperity for its people. Aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Agenda 2063 of the African Union, our development plan serves as a comprehensive blueprint for transformative acceleration in critical areas, such as agriculture and food security, human capital development, job creation for our youth, infrastructure development and technology.
With the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), including the Declaration on Future Generations and the Global Digital Compact, at the Summit of The Future, my Government is reinforcing its commitment to championing and investing in human capital development. Human capital development is a profound commitment to our people’s well-being and future. By investing significantly in education, healthcare and agriculture, my Government is laying the foundation for a prosperous and equitable Sierra Leone. Over the past six years, our achievements through our Free Quality School Education Programme, legislative reviews, governance reforms in the education sector and radical inclusion strategy have been highly impactful, well acclaimed and seen as a good model for the world. We welcome the Global Digital Compact’s principle of ensuring safe, secure and trustworthy emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence, to offer new opportunities to accelerate development, leaving no one behind.
In the area of gender equality and women’s economic empowerment, significant strides have been made, and they are some of the legacies my Government will bequeath to our current and future generations. I recently signed into law this year a bill prohibiting child marriage, following the historic signing into law of the Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Act of 2023. That is all meant to ensure the realization of the national aspiration for our women and girls to build an inclusive and equitable society. I remain steadfast in my commitment to ensuring that every girl and woman lives in a safe environment, with ample opportunities to realize their full potential and thrive equally in the world.
From prioritizing the women and peace and security agenda at the Security Council to the adoption by the General Assembly of a resolution condemning all forms of sexual and gender-based violence and urging all countries to provide victims and survivors with access to justice, reparations and assistance (resolution 76/304), we will continue to advocate for women and girls across the globe. Therefore, I am pleased to announce that Sierra Leone will commence preparatory work that will lead to the convening of a diplomatic conference to conclude an international legally binding instrument on access to justice for sexual violence survivors — the proposed Freetown treaty — in furtherance of the success of resolution 76/304 on access to justice, remedies and assistance for survivors of sexual violence.
Leaving no one behind and acting together to achieve sustainable development similarly means that we have to end global economic inequalities and ensure that Governments in least developed countries can deliver the dividends of democracy. The unmanageable debt crisis, the lack of capital flows, the devastating impacts of climate change and the lack of climate finance, conflicts and political instability around the world are increasing the odds of developing countries not achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. The role of development finance institutions in supporting the objectives of national development plans of low-income countries, particularly those emphasizing the SDGs, is of great significance to their socioeconomic development.
At the International Development Association (IDA) for Africa Heads of State Summit in Nairobi in April, Sierra Leone unreservedly expressed its endorsement of the Nairobi IDA communiqué. The communiqué exemplifies the collective aspiration of the African Heads of State present to raise the level of development support in Africa through the IDA21 Replenishment. I wish to re-echo that endorsement at this gathering. IDA’s affordable, concessional finance allows Africa’s leaders to develop their economies, enhance education and healthcare, deal with the increasing effects of climate change and expand electricity and digital access — without becoming buried in unsustainable debt.
In conclusion, the end of the Second World War in 1945 did not only unite leaders but also urged them to cooperate. That was the birth of multilateralism. As the African proverb says, “Our two hands do not wash themselves; they wash each other”. As leaders, we must cooperate to achieve the purposes of the United Nations and deliver peace, security, stability and prosperity for our people. Divisions and unhealthy competition will lead only to humankind’s destruction. We must ensure unity in diversity, where the rights of the weak and the minority are protected. Therefore, let us safeguard our multilateral system. Let us cooperate, acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations, leaving no one behind.
