When I first came to the General Assembly in 2019, I know that many people did not know El Salvador or had never even heard of El Salvador — and if they had, it was only for negative reasons, as either the most violent country or the country of gangs. Others did not even know where to find it on the map. But, thank God, that has changed significantly, and in a very short time. Five years after that first address (see A/74/PV.7), I come here as the President of a country that now has a voice in the world. In my previous addresses to the General Assembly, I spoke about the quest for our true independence. For decades we were shackled by the consequences of an imported civil war and then by a false peace that left more dead than the war itself.
I also spoke of the importance of remembering that a government’s first responsibility is to its own people and underlined that taking our destiny into our own hands was essential. We were naive to think that other countries would save us or give us our freedom out of simple kindness. We had to understand those things in order to find the courage to break our chains ourselves and claim our legitimate right to be free.
In the last five years, El Salvador has been reborn. We gave the streets of our country back to our people and established a thriving tourism industry, hosting international surfing, sports and entertainment events. We gave thousands of Salvadorans who fled wars and poverty a country to return to. We made our nation, once the homicide capital of the world, the safest country in the entire Western hemisphere. It was the greatest challenge our nation has ever overcome, and although we still have a long way to go and there are still many things to accomplish, we are within reach of true independence and on the road to full freedom. El Salvador’s transformation is unparalleled, and our success is undeniable. Anyone can visit El Salvador and see for themselves. Salvadorans, regardless of who they voted for, regardless of the town or city where they were born, regardless of how much or how little they have, regardless of whether they are inside or outside our borders, have united to work and support each of our decisions, each of which has allowed El Salvador to be a country where people can live in peace and happiness, where spiritual aspirations, beyond material ones, are within everyone’s reach.
Today the world considers the example of El Salvador and wonders, how can a nation lift itself up in such a short amount of time? But perhaps that is not the question they should be asking. Maybe they should be asking how it is that the world is collapsing so fast.
It is said that El Salvador is swimming against the tide, because, as El Salvador has become safer, the world has become less safe. While the Salvadoran people are becoming more optimistic, most people in the modern world are becoming increasingly pessimistic. And, yes, they are right: the world has become divided, depressed, worried, hostile and hopeless, and it has done so at an unprecedented speed.
Today the free world is no longer free, and that is no exaggeration. Tragically we see undeniable evidence of the decline every day. New threats of wars are ongoing. When the free world became free it was because of its principles of freedom of speech, equality before the law, unity and respect for private property. But once a nation abandons the principles that make it free, it is only a matter of time before it loses its freedom altogether.
The consequences are unfolding before our very eyes. We can see it. In some so-called first-world cities, stores need to secure their products behind locked glass doors to prevent theft. I am not even talking about expensive products, but simple things like a chocolate bar or a razor. In other cities, the streets no longer belong to the people but have fallen into the hands of homeless people and gangs and become the domain of organized crime and drugs. One cannot claim to be the free world, if one’s people are not free to walk the streets without the fear of being harassed, robbed or killed.
We are also witnessing in real time the erosion of freedom of expression. Just a decade ago, the West was the bastion of free speech but today is being called out by those it used to denounce. At the request of their governments, the world’s largest social media platforms have been forced to censor their users. Citizens of Western countries have been arrested for sharing posts on social media. Ruling parties have attempted to ban their political opposition. These are not accusations or conspiracy theories; they are verifiable and widely documented facts.
The respect of the people cannot be won without respecting the people. This development is not new, but we notice it more now because in recent years it has accelerated, which means that we are approaching a dangerous turning point: we are facing a new dark age for humankind. Salvadorans recognize the symptoms of decadence when we see them because we have been through them all. We lived through the stages of our nation’s downfall one by one, and we are seeing those same stages once again, but now on a global scale.
We cannot and do not want to tell other countries what to do. Each country must make its own decisions and do what is best for its people. We can only offer a word of caution from a friend who has been through a dark period himself and fought the battle of his life to get out of it.
We cannot change the course of the world. El Salvador is too small a country to do that. We are in fact the smallest country in all of the Americas. This situation is much bigger than us, and in truth it is bigger than any nation. We cannot prevent the dark times ahead, but what we can do is become a small shelter from the coming storm and maintain hope.
In El Salvador we do not imprison our opposition or censor opinion, nor do we confiscate the property of those who think differently. We do not arrest people for expressing their ideas. In El Salvador, one’s freedom of expression and one’s private property will always be protected. In El Salvador we prioritize the safety of our honest citizens over the comfort of criminals. Some say that we have imprisoned thousands, but the reality is that we have freed millions. Now it is the good guys who live free and without fear, with their freedoms and human rights fully respected.
We want our people to prosper, which is why we foster innovation and encourage new ideas. We understand that safe and free spaces are needed for invention to flourish. Creative ideas should be investigated, tested and experimented with; they should not be stifled by outdated regulations or fear of change.
In El Salvador people will find spaces to pursue their ambitions, whether in technology, finance, energy, medicine, the arts, culture, music or architecture. A few years ago, El Salvador was one of the darkest places on the planet. But in a short time our nation has been reborn, and that is because we reminded ourselves that freedom is taken hold of. It is not a gift, nor is it given away, and, like everything in life worth having, it needs care and maintenance.
Today El Salvador is a country safe for progress and innovation, as well as for families and for individual pursuit. In the new El Salvador everyone has a place. We offer this safe space primarily for our people, but it is also for those who wish to share in and contribute to our vision.
It will not be easy. In fact, it is possible that the next step will be more difficult than the previous one. We have liberated our country, but we must preserve that freedom and do so in a world that is increasingly less free. El Salvador has left behind its past, to which it vows never to return. It may be too late to avoid the dark times facing our world today, but it is not too late to build an ark and weather the storm. May God bless humankind.
