Mahatma Gandhi said that there is no path to peace. Peace is the path. In the same spirit of fraternal love and with an open heart, I address the General Assembly today on behalf of the Republic of Serbia, a founding country of the United Nations and a country of freedom and justice. It is my honour to address the Assembly as President of the Republic of Serbia, the country on whose behalf I stand proudly before everyone today. It is a country that, despite the current global challenges, consistently perseveres in defending the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law and that, through its activities and principled policy, strongly advocates the idea that is the main topic of this year’s session.
When we talk about the current moment, this year again, to my immense regret, I have to state that the situation in the world seems even more difficult and dark than a year ago. Tensions are growing and challenges are becoming more numerous and complex. What worries me the most is that, despite our declaratory efforts for peace, development and prosperity of humankind, there is no end in sight to that geopolitical nightmare. I would not like to see the wise words of the former President John Fitzgerald Kennedy becoming the words of a prophet: mankind must put an end to war or war will put an end to mankind. Today, mankind relies more on technology than it relies on mankind.
This year, we are once again talking about tragic conflicts and destruction that bring suffering and enormous human losses, as well as about the numerous serious consequences that inevitably accompany armed conflicts. The Republic of Serbia and the Serbian people deeply sympathize and share the grief for all the lives lost in the conflicts happening around the world, including the tragic events in the Middle East and Ukraine. It is unforgivable that today, in the twenty-first century, we are talking about gruesome figures related to children who have died in conflicts.
It seems absolutely incredible, but the world is on the verge of nuclear disaster and nuclear Holocaust. In a desire to win and to destroy the other, step by step, we had been getting closer to the verge of the precipice and, eventually, we got there. We live in a world in which no one listens to anyone — people are listening only to their own arguments and their own truth, while the other must disappear because they always threaten people’s universally false values.
We need to talk, even when we disagree. We need to restore the eroded credibility and authority of the United Nations. And that is why Serbia will continue to strongly support an increase in the presence of African countries on the Security Council, which we believe would mean a lot for ensuring global peace. We need to stop the application of double standards in order to restore faith in international law and the principles we all agreed on long ago. We must restore faith in peace — the only path, to which there is no alternative. We owe that to every innocent victim anywhere in the world and to all the current and succeeding generations. The future of the world in the next five or 25 years is a matter of our choice, but it is also our responsibility.
All of us who have gathered here from all over the world have done so for what we would say are noble reasons but are, first and foremost, selfish reasons. Almost always, the leaders from all the countries, even the most powerful ones, speak before the General Assembly, allegedly addressing the members, but they are actually addressing only their own public and not caring substantially for the real concerns of the world today. I am not much different, but today I will speak to the Assembly not only about Serbia, a founding country of the United Nations, its successes and rapid growth rate, because I have the opportunity to brag about the results we have achieved in my country. And incidentally, I know that not everyone here is very interested in that regard. Today I will speak about how the collapse of the modern world started, and about when and how the Charter of the United Nations was discredited and when we stopped believing in law and started appeasing the logic of force. I will explain it using the example of my country, Serbia, which, to me, is the most beautiful country in the world, and how it was being destroyed and trampled on, and how today, because of its tenacity and freedom-loving tradition, it is a small stone in the shoe of the big and powerful countries.
After the big victories won by the better part of humankind in the First World War and the Second World War, after the Serbs had suffered the biggest losses proportionally to the size of their nation in the First World War and in the Second World War, in which Serbia was one of the few nations in South-East Europe to confront the Nazis from the very beginning — which is perhaps why Belgrade, Serbia’s capital, was the only city that had been brutally bombed and devastated already at the beginning of 1941. We Serbs, unlike others, did not welcome Nazi tanks with flowers, and we paid a high price for that.
Nevertheless, neither crying, nor laments from the distant past, nor self-victimization is the subject of my speech today. I would like to warn my dear friends in this Hall about what happened to Serbia — a precedent that is being used and abused in different parts of the world. I want to warn members about the Pandora’s box that was opened not two or five years ago, but much earlier, and about which everyone’s silence is deafening. The absolute dominance of the Western capitalist way of manufacturing, its science and technological supremacy, and its convincing victory against the Eastern contenders — the Soviet Union first and foremost — within the context of the third industrial revolution, brought the world, some would say, to the end of history, and ushered in the complete hegemony of Western ideas in all spheres of social life. Apart from the good things it brought to humankind, of course, that prevailing absence of balance and political multilateralism also destroyed the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. Of course, that did not happen by accident. By all means, it did not happen by itself but was helped by the decisive involvement of Western intelligence services, which were supported by the national corrupted elite, both in the Soviet Union and in Yugoslavia.
Why am I mentioning all of that? I am mentioning it because even today we have heard from many that, as a result of Russia attacking Ukraine, Pandora’s box has been opened and international law is being undermined, in a precedent not seen in Europe since the Second World War. That is utterly false. To be clear, Serbia supports the Charter of the United Nations and Ukraine’s territorial integrity and has never questioned those in the least, nor shall we in the future. However, when the big leaders speak vigorously and ardently here about the need for Ukrainian freedom and about the observance of the United Nations and its Charter and resolutions, I ask myself why they do not observe the Charter of the United Nations and resolution 1244 (1999) when it comes to the territorial integrity of Serbia. Why did the West use its own power to strike us in moments when it thought that it could violate the norms of international law the way it wanted, to the extent it wanted and as long as it wanted because it had finally won against all its opponents — which made it possible for it to spill its rage upon one small nation and to relentlessly and swiftly commit violations of all norms and regulations, without even attempting to provide any explanation for doing so.
That is why, in 1999, the Security Council attempted to adopt a draft resolution on the attack and aggression against Serbia (see S/PV.3989). No consensus had been reached in that regard, but the decision was nevertheless taken to attack and bomb Serbia and to commit aggression, because at that time the Western Powers could not care less about the Charter of the United Nations, United Nations resolutions or international law. They were the uncontested Powers that did not ask anyone about anything, and they thought it would go on like that for hundreds of years. It was by accident that we, the citizens of Serbia, were the ones who paid the high price. It could have been anybody else. That is why it does not even occur to me to say that we were angels and had no responsibility in all that. But essentially, the destiny of one small nation was decided by the big and mighty Western Powers, without regard for its rights or for justice.
It is interesting that first they helped tear apart the big Yugoslavia along the lines of internal communist borders. Interestingly, once they were finished with that, we thought it was the end, but there was no end. That is when they started tearing down Serbia — an independent, democratic and internationally recognized country and a member of the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe — and only Serbia. I would ask that members pay attention to that today. They will speak passionately about defending the alleged sovereignty of States from secession and separatism only until the next opportunity for secession and separatism to be justified by alleged humanitarian disasters and everything else that they will never accept as an argument in certain other cases.
And to give representatives of countries and nations worldwide one last example, on the paper that I am holding in my hand it is written that, except for those forces under the control of the United Nations — in this moment, that is the NATO-led Kosovo Force, with which we have fair cooperation — no one can have armed forces on the territory of Kosovo and Metohija, which is, in line with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), part of Serbia. Yet those who committed the aggression against Serbia and who tried to separate a part of its territory still try, convincing us that the only democratic and reasonable solution is for Kosovo and Metohija to secede from Serbia. They have been providing arms on a daily basis to what are today known as the so-called Kosovo Security Force, and what will tomorrow become the armed forces of Albanians on the territory of Serbia.
When we ask them which international document they are acting in accordance with in doing that — because it is all an attempt to provoke a war in violation of the norms of the United Nations — like a fig leaf, they cover up with the stupidest possible answer in the world: “Well, we do not accept the Charter of the United Nations nor United Nations resolutions, because for us the situation has changed, since we recognized the independence of Kosovo 15 years ago.”
But what is their message to us, my dear friends? Their message is that they have the power, that they are God and that they do not care about the United Nations and its resolutions, nor about the law. Their message is that they can do whatever they want, the way they want and for as long as they want.
And now, I am asking my dear friends and representatives — not of those obedient satellite and puppet countries, but of those freedom-loving nations and countries — what we, as a small country, can do. How can we fight? Because everyone in the world speaks about Ukraine, yet no one dares speak about Serbia. And even if they do, they claim that we will start a war in the Balkans on Russia’s order. But they have been lying the whole time, for more than two and a half years. We are servants neither of Russia nor the United States of America. We have our own politics and our own interests. And that is why I want to tell representatives that the only hope — not only for my country, which I love more than anything in the world, but also for their countries — is to understand well the mechanisms of lies and fraud in international relations and to gather here, in the most important Organization, to try to change that and to try to respect it, because that is the only way to preserve peace.
The world is on the verge of disaster, and everyone is allegedly defending principles, yet no one admits any mistakes. It is clear to us all that there are no principles anywhere and that no one has them. Only the small countries that have nowhere else to go have principles, which are all they can grasp. And all that the big ones have left to do — once they have crushed all the small ones — is to eat one other. Only when their bites are no longer so easy and small do they remember the principles, and then accuse the others of violating those same principles.
When the aggression against Serbia started on 24 March 1999, a representative of my country, Vladislav Jovanović — a highly respected and exceptional Serbian diplomat — made, in the Security Council, on behalf of the Government of the then Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, an urgent appeal to all countries to categorically oppose the aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at the time. Listen to his words 25 years later:
“If the aggression is not stopped, the precedent of such unpunished aggression will, sooner or later, lead to aggression against a number of other, smaller and medium-sized countries. The real question is: Which country is next?”
(S/PV.3988, p. 14) Members may have heard several proposals today as to which country will be next.
This time, let me quote Nobel Peace Prize winner and former President of the United States of America, Barack Obama. He said:
“[P]eace is more than the absence of war. A lasting peace — for nations and individuals — depends upon a sense of justice and opportunity; of dignity and freedom.” (A/66/PV.11, p. 10)
The unreasonable nature of the policy pursued by Pristina and the so-called Kosovo authorities and the fanaticism surrounding, and the persecution of, everything Serbian in Kosovo and Metohija are reflected in a series of disturbing moves. Such moves range from the ban on payments in the Serbian currency — the dinar — in Kosovo and Metohija, which has lasted for more than six months, and the ban on postal services, which is unique in the world — even in conflict areas — and endangers the daily life of Serbs and other non-Albanian populations, to the ban on the visit by the Head of the Serbian Orthodox Church, Patriarch Porfirije, to the Patriarchate of Peć. Can the intrusion by the armed so-called Kosovo special police on 9 September onto the premises of an association that provides support to children with developmental disabilities and their parents be described as anything other than brutality and cruelty, as well as insanity?
As stated by Nelson Mandela, real and lasting peace can be reached only through justice and respect for human rights. How can there be peace in Kosovo and Metohija if the legal order and fundamental rights of an entire nation are being systematically undermined? In the light of all of the aforementioned, the key question today is: What is the path forward for Serbia, and how can we resolve the situation?
First and foremost, Serbia is on its European path and sincerely wants to be a part of the European Union (EU). Serbia’s economy is currently the most successful economy in the entire Western Balkans region, but even today, the very same EU we strive to be a part of makes it clear to us, through the statements of its spokesperson Peter Stano, that it does not observe the principles of the Charter of the United Nations nor even the decisions of its own European Council by supporting the independence of the so-called Kosovo, because that is in the interests of the biggest and most powerful countries on the European continent.
Serbia is a small country that cannot compete with the big Powers. We are fully aware of that. Nevertheless, we have an obligation — to ourselves and to our people, as well as to all our friends around the world — not to lie to anyone, and to tell everyone the truth. Since all the big countries are interested neither in law nor in truth, there is nothing left but for small but proud Serbia to be dedicated and committed to its economic progress, accelerated growth, new technologies and innovation and to look towards the future, waiting for the moment when observance of the principles of international law is brought back to the world’s political stage.
We will remain committed to the dialogue with Pristina and under the auspices of the EU, and we will fight to preserve peace. There is only one thing that we will never give to anyone, and that is the freedom and independence of Serbia.
As the President of Serbia, I believe in a world based on real, not false, values. I believe that the strength of developing countries — all of us who have raised our heads and dare to speak the truth — will provide the foundation for a new, different and better world.
