At the onset, allow me to extend warm greetings and congratulations on behalf of Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of South Sudan, to Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of South Sudan, would have loved to be here but could not, due to competing demands back home. The Republic of South Sudan stands ready to support Mr. Yang during his tenure at the helm of the General Assembly.
Allow me to also warmly bid farewell to Ambassador Dennis Francis, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, for his stellar work in service of the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations. We are especially grateful for his proactive leadership, as illustrated by the goodwill visit to South Sudan in June that he undertook in support of the ongoing efforts to consolidate peace, security and development in our country.
The theme of the seventy-ninth session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, speaks directly to the present state of global affairs. The ideals and values envisioned in the United Nations Charter are as important, relevant and crucial now as they were at the founding of the Organization on 24 October 1945. They remain essential to addressing serious global challenges, including conflict, unrestrained nationalism, geopolitical competition, food insecurity, climatic shocks, natural disasters, pandemics and threats to international peace and security.
The revitalized Government of National Unity, as repeatedly stated by the President of the Republic of South Sudan, President Salva Kiir Mayardit, is fully committed to consolidating peace in our country. The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is the primary vehicle for ensuring peace and stability in our country. Thus far, we have made tangible progress in our quest for durable peace and political stability in the country, but we have been constrained by resource challenges in fully meeting key benchmarks of the Agreement. Nonetheless, all the signatories to the peace accord remain steadfast in consolidating the gains made so far in the form of relative stability and joining hands to complete the rest of the outstanding elements. That unity of purpose was illustrated in the recent endorsement by the Cabinet of the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the revitalized National Legislature of a 24-month extension of the transitional period, paving the way for the organization of free and fair general elections to be conducted in the Republic of South Sudan by the end of December 2026.
The decision to postpone the previously scheduled elections was justified by the fact that essential security sector mechanisms and elections-related institutions require more time to fulfil their mandates. The mobilization of funds to complete those important tasks, which are critical to the conduct of free, fair and credible elections in the Republic of South Sudan, also demands more time. Most importantly, the process of constitution-making covers a series of activities and requires an adequate time frame for effective consultations with all stakeholders in order to ensure that a broadly accepted constitution is adopted in South Sudan. We therefore call on the United Nations and the broader international community to join us in ensuring that this new road map for a peaceful transition in South Sudan is met by providing the required financial and technical support for the process.
Furthermore, I am pleased to report that the revitalized Government is currently engaged in robust and promising negotiations with hold-out groups through the Tumaini Initiative, under the auspices of the Government of the Republic of Kenya, to address all grievances and guarantee the return of opposition leaders to the Republic of South Sudan.
Over the past year, the conflict in the Sudan, a neighbour of South Sudan, has created one of the worst humanitarian crises in the world, as confirmed by the United Nations and other agencies. As an immediate neighbour, we have been impacted by the conflict, with over 800,000 refugees and returnees fleeing the war, crossing our borders and settling in South Sudan. While we profoundly appreciate the efforts of the United Nations and humanitarian agencies working to alleviate the suffering of the victims of the conflict, we strongly encourage support for the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) peace initiative to bring peace to the Sudan.
Furthermore, we also believe that the international community’s support for the victims of the war remains inadequate and unresponsive to the impact on the host communities that are also grappling with serious humanitarian challenges. Therefore, we are calling on the international community to expand its support and closely engage with the Government of the Republic of South Sudan to mitigate the negative impacts of war on all victims.
It is worth mentioning that the conflict in the Republic of the Sudan has also directly impacted the economic situation in the Republic of South Sudan, with oil production significantly reduced since April. Given the fact that our economy is entirely reliant on the revenues we collect from the sale of oil that passes through Port Sudan, we urge the international community to redouble its efforts towards resolving the conflict in the Sudan. We further call for more solidarity with South Sudan as it struggles to overcome and withstand the dire economic impacts created by the conflict in the Sudan.
Over the past 70 years, half a billion people in Africa have been affected by the impacts of climate change. As a result, South Sudan battles and suffers from the devastating impacts of flood and drought. Millions of people have been displaced and many lives have been lost due to floods and drought. Therefore, there is a need to scale up adaptation action and support to ensure an adequate response in the context of the climate crisis. Moreover, we strongly urge developed countries to exercise greater leadership by expanding their financial contribution to the required global mitigation and adaptation interventions, as trillions of dollars are needed annually to tackle the crisis and restore trust in the multilateral system.
South Sudan recently conducted its first Voluntary National Review on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the recommendations emerging from the findings are informing our immediate interventions. Moreover, our revised National Development Strategy and annual budgets are crafted around a commitment to the SDGs. Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance and Planning and the National Bureau of Statistics, with the support of United Nations agencies and development partners, are working to strengthen the capacity of the national statistical system to collect quality and analyse timely and reliable data.
The Government is actively mobilizing resources to conduct the national population and housing census, thereby ensuring evidence-based planning and the delivery of essential services to the people. As South Sudan capacitates its statistical system and bolsters its analytical capabilities, the Government is using multidimensional poverty index measures to guide related policies, designing multifaceted interventions to improve the lives of disadvantaged groups and track progress.
In recognition of the role of women in public life in South Sudan, I am delighted to report to the Assembly that South Sudan is making great strides and improvements in gender equality. The Government of South Sudan believes that the active engagement of women in governance and decision-making is critical to ensuring the implementation of the commitments contained in the peace agreement signed in 2018, the Maputo Protocol, the National Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000), the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a particularly powerful advocacy tool for equal representation in national governance.
As a reflection of our commitment to gender equity, South Sudan’s Transitional Constitution enshrines a 35 per cent affirmative action provision for women in all structures of our Government. The peace agreement also mandates the establishment of the Women Enterprise Fund, which shall serve as a vehicle for assigning resources that can leverage the entrepreneurial and innovative energies of our dynamic female population. We strongly believe that all those initiatives align with the theme of leaving no one behind.
South Sudan is a young country in terms of its population, with young people constituting over 70 per cent of the population. That demographic reality can be harnessed for a brighter future through proactive and progressive investment in young people. The Republic of South Sudan aims to develop a robust education policy that is focused on unlocking that potential through job creation and innovation and benchmarked under the provisions enshrined in the African Youth Charter and United Nations resolutions on youth-related empowerment.
The Ministry of Youth and Sports and our National Assembly are jointly working on legislation for a national youth service and a youth enterprise development fund to enhance the capacities of our young people. Once adopted, those two laws shall create the necessary conditions for the empowerment of our youth. Therefore, we call on the United Nations and the international community to augment our efforts to enhance the level of technical and financial support to the Government in the spirit of Our Common Agenda and the better future envisioned by the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), adopted at the recently concluded Summit of the Future.
South Sudan’s universal health coverage service index is among the lowest in the region and globally. That is attributed to the conflict, economic crises in the country and the consequences of climate change, resulting in a fragile health system. Maternal and infant mortality rates remain the worst in the world. As such, the Government of the Republic of South Sudan commits to investing in affordable, accessible and standards-strengthened health-care systems. We are committed to the optimal health and well-being of our citizens via a primary health-care approach as the most inclusive, equitable and cost-effective path to universal health coverage. The provision of preventive health services through national programmes addressing malaria, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, routine immunization and maternal and child health, including nutritional health services, is crucial to the reduction of the economic burden of health-care expenditures for households and the health-care system in South Sudan.
Pandemic preparedness and response through a multisector approach have put us on a path to tackle public health emergencies, such as responding to the current mpox pandemic and other disease epidemics in the country. Most importantly, our commitment to addressing the burden of both infectious disease and the rising burden of non-communicable diseases, as we aim at reducing mortality rates, remains our top priority. Success in achieving all those objectives will promote the Sustainable Development Goal health targets for 2030, which will enhance the strategies for the Africa We Want agenda by 2063.
As part of our commitment as a country to transforming education, the Government of South Sudan recognizes every child’s right to quality education and is addressing the issues of access, equity and inclusion. Based on that premise, the Government’s commitment has been translated into several actions or interventions. Primarily, President Salva Kiir Mayardit reiterated the Government’s policy of universal basic education for all children, regardless of their background or gender, in February 2023. That has had a considerable impact not only on improving enrolment and retention in schools, but also on combating the early and forced marriages that have compelled many girls to drop out of school. Consequently, we have achieved the enrolment and retention of almost 3 million learners at the primary education level, almost attaining gender parity.
As Members are aware, President Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of South Sudan, as the incumbent Chairperson of the East African Community, has consistently emphasized the need for the maintenance of peace and security in the East African region, the Great Lakes and the Horn of Africa. The President’s efforts align with the theme of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General’s call in the Summit of the Future.
One of the main impediments to South Sudan’s full realization of sustainable peace and security is the fact that the Security Council continues to maintain sanctions, individually targeted sanctions and the arms embargo despite our calls and those of the African Union and IGAD for them to be lifted. Those punitive measures have had a negative impact, restraining South Sudan’s full potential by preventing the Government from maintaining effective deterrence against negative non-State actors that foment violence and insecurity in our country. Moreover, potential investors in various sectors believe that South Sudan is under broad sanctions and, as a result, refrain from investing in our country. As a country, we have experienced relative peace and stability for the past six years and the continued imposition of those punitive measures is not reflective of the progress we have made so far.
For any meaningful peace and security to prevail in the world, we urgently call for the reform of the Security Council to be fit for purpose in today’s global dynamics and realities. The United Nations has been an integral element in that effort, but it has to evolve in its processes and structures to more optimally address contemporary problems. It is in that context that we join the call for the expansion of the Security Council to incorporate the voice of Africans in an equitable way that reflects the continent’s weight and relevance in the maintenance of global peace, order and security.
Therefore, I want to hereby state that South Sudan unequivocally supports the African Common Position as the most optimal way to restructure the Security Council. The reform proposal announced recently, which grants Africa two permanent seats on the Security Council without veto powers, is counterproductive and falls short of the spirit of inclusive and equitable global governance that we have been calling for. It only exacerbates the current inequities and fails to achieve the elusive consensus and cooperation required in the Security Council. South Sudan therefore calls for a text-based negotiation that is more viable and will lead to a Security Council with enhanced credibility and acceptance.
In conclusion, I wish to restate our appreciation for President Yang’s leadership of the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly and to express our commitment to the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations.
