This General Assembly session is of historic significance, as we embark on a process of recalibrating international relations and establishing a more effective multilateral framework. I therefore extend my heartfelt congratulations to the President on his election to preside over this esteemed body. Allow me also to congratulate the outgoing President from Trinidad and Tobago on a job well done under difficult circumstances.
This Organization was founded after two devastating world wars. Its original purpose remains relevant today — to save current and future generations from the disastrous consequences of wars and armed conflicts and to foster peace and political stability for sustained prosperity for all. We, however, observe instead that the world is marked by a complex political and security crisis, weakening our global multilateral framework of collective solidarity, international law and respect for humanitarian law. The conflicts that divide us are not isolated incidents. They are symptoms of deeper systemic challenges, rising inequality, environmental degradation and the breakdown of global trust.
The time has come to dare to make bold decisions, to revisit our global governance architecture and to recommit to the original goals of the United Nations.
With statistics showing that countries are not on track to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, while projections estimate that almost 600 million people will continue to live in extreme poverty in 2030, it is incumbent upon us to close the gap between aspiration and financing. I wish to emphasize the urgent need for accelerated reforms and coordination within the international financial architecture, especially the international financial institutions. The multidimensional vulnerability index (MVI) offers a comprehensive and inclusive framework that goes beyond traditional metrics to capture the true complexity of the vulnerabilities of small island developing States and low-lying coastal States. We urgently call for the MVI to be embedded in the operations of the international, financial institutions, especially the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.
Apart from the multidimensional vulnerability index, we see other financial obstacles in place that have a major negative impact on our ability to generate development, especially the de-risking measures of international banks, which are based on general assessments and do not consider the countries’ reality and the severe impact on a given country’s development objectives. That must be addressed head-on if we want to be inclusive, rather than exclusive.
My country, Suriname, can attest to the vitally urgent need to reform the global financial and political system and to build greater trust in the multilateral system. Because of our ranking, we are not eligible for several global financial instruments, to the detriment of my people. Since taking office in July 2020, my Government has successfully started a policy of financial-economic reforms, including restructuring the debt portfolio, supported by an IMF programme and international financial institutions.
The impact of the various crises and of national efforts to reform the economy has not been easy for the population, but we are on the road to recovery now; macroeconomic stability has been achieved. We established a social safety net and increased several social benefits, all meant to make sure that we did not forget or exclude that part of our population from restoring a healthier economy.
Statistics from 2024 reveal that progress in the area of climate action is inadequate, with global greenhouse gas emissions still rising, despite the need for reductions. Climate action can no longer be postponed or ignored. Soon, we will meet in Azerbaijan for the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Will we be repeating ourselves with empty promises and pledges? Or will we take decisive action to save this planet from extinction?
Suriname is committed to the Paris Agreement. Suriname has also submitted ambitious, nationally determined contributions and has recently started the process of carbon credit trading. Suriname aims to remain a carbon-negative country, with a high level of biodiversity and more than 90 per cent forest coverage. With that conscious choice to limit deforestation, we sacrifice economic development for our people. For that, we are not compensated, while everyone benefits from our decision. Carbon-negative and carbon-neutral countries must be supported for maintaining those statuses.
We are in favour of a just transition to a carbon-free economy over the coming decades, but we also expect to be allowed to develop our natural resources in an environmentally friendly and balanced manner, in compliance with international standards and practices. In fact, we have already embarked on such a development path by introducing more renewables into our energy grid, utilizing technological innovations to reduce our carbon footprint even further.
Over the past 100 years, Suriname has had industrial development of the bauxite industry, onshore oil production and gold production, in addition to agricultural production and other industries. Despite those activities, Suriname is among the three carbon-negative countries in the world. At the same time, Suriname is among the seven most vulnerable countries with respect to the effects of rising sea levels. Not only have the international pledges for climate financing not materialized as pledged, but access to the available resources is an enormous challenge. The application and appraisal procedures must be simplified so as to achieve the required impact at a local level. Regrettably, we also observe that a large part of those funds has been diverted into time-consuming and expensive studies, consultancies and advisory services. In the meantime, the situation on the ground in the affected regions and countries is deteriorating. Often, the requested assistance comes too late.
To transform the well-being of our communities, we must embrace diversity and work towards social justice and inclusion. That is what responsible leaders do — ensure that no one is left out or excluded. We must practice what we preach. While the humanitarian and security situation in the Republic of Haiti remains of concern, we are pleased to note that, partly through the leadership of the Caribbean Community, a road map towards free and fair elections has been initiated and a transition Government with a clear mandate has been installed. We cannot leave Haiti and its people alone and behind. Haiti fatigue is not an option. We urge the international community to financially and technically support Haiti on its path forward. Suriname will contribute security personnel to the Multinational Security Support Mission and remains committed to assisting it in whatever way we can. We call for a more effective, coordinated and coherent approach and for the transparent sharing of information regarding the different initiatives so as to more effectively serve the Haitian people and the objectives of facilitating peace, security and prosperity in Haiti.
Leaving no one behind should also include lifting the long-standing economic embargo against Cuba and its people. The adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) represents an opportunity to chart a new path for humankind so as to address current challenges while laying the groundwork for sustainable solutions. We need to foster collaboration and strengthen partnerships if we are to address long-term global issues such as climate change, social inequality and access to affordable healthcare and quality education for all. Small nations need support for digital transformation and to be provided with the tools and capacity-building initiatives needed for them to fully integrate into the global digital economy. We must utilize technology in a positive and constructive manner in order to facilitate financial inclusion for all and access to general education and skills training, telemedicine and treatment and instant Government services.
This year, 2024, marks the fifth time that I am addressing the General Assembly. In 2020, I delivered my maiden address (see A/75/PV.7) remotely through the use of modern technology. At that time, I remarked that multilateralism had come under attack on several occasions. Four years later, we still have a long way to go. We must work collectively and with a sense of urgency and a positive attitude towards renewing our commitment to a multilateral framework that is more inclusive, equitable and accountable, with the ultimate goal of creating a better, safer and more productive planet for our people, now and in future.
In conclusion, the theme of leaving no one behind is a call to action, but is also a challenge. For smaller countries like Suriname, the global system often perpetuates exclusion, which at times assumes new guises. As we reaffirm our renewed commitment to building a more just, inclusive and equitable international system in which accountability is important, together we must ensure that no nation, community, individual, woman or child is excluded or left behind when it comes to the promise of peace, prosperity and dignity. Let us live up to the spirit of “one for all and all for one”. May God bless us all.
