It is an honour and privilege to address the Assembly from this podium. It is my first time doing so in my capacity as President of Slovakia.
The United Nations Organization, which we helped to found with our brotherly Czech nation under Czechoslovakia’s flag, has been here for almost eight decades. We could spend hours discussing its imperfections and flaws. We have a legitimate right to ask how the United Nations delivers on its core mission — that is, maintaining peace, guaranteeing international law and protecting human rights — and most importantly, why it fails to do so quite often.
Despite all its faults and failures, the United Nations is the only truly global forum we have. It is the backbone of the world order, based on rules and international law. The cornerstone of the world as we know it, the United Nations is a vital international ecosystem for most countries in the world, including Slovakia.
The sovereignty of the majority is — to a great extent — based on our ability to cooperate, show solidarity and look for points where our often-different interests meet. It builds on our readiness to reach a compromise and respect our diversity, based on shared universal values, rules and obligations. Especially in today’s uncertain times, it is a powerful pillar of sovereignty, just like its classic features — territorial integrity or independence of action. The way we cooperate tells a story about us, where we belong, what we reach for and, eventually, who we are as people, community and humankind.
Our joint confidence in the existing system of international relations — with the United Nations as its key element — is what separates us from chaos and arbitrariness, in other words, from war and violence. There are countries and entities among us that believe that the absence of rules will be the breeding ground for their future success. They believe that force is above the law. In reality, however, the collapse of a rules-based system would eventually adversely affect those who, today, desire it the most. In Slovakia’s immediate vicinity — in Ukraine — a war has been going on for almost 1,000 days as a result of Russia’s aggression, which violates such basic principles of international law as sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is worth repeating that our neighbour, Ukraine, is legitimately defending itself and its people according to international law, including the Charter of the United Nations. Every day, this war continues to destroy the lives, infrastructure and future of Ukrainian men and women. Nor is it any good to for Russia’s people, as they too are dying. The war has come to them as well. The escalation is growing. It is high time to start looking for a peaceful, sustainable and just end to this conflict based on the principles of international law and the United Nations Charter.
Looking at the world’s geography, to certain parts of the globe it might seem like a local conflict and not the only serious conflict the world is facing today, by far. Let us recall the suffering of the people in Gaza after the horrific terrorist attack by Hamas against Israel, and the casualties on both sides, or the State collapses in Haiti and the Sudan, both of which were followed by humanitarian disasters. However, from the point of view of the international community, what we see here is an existential struggle for the nature and the future of international law and adherence to agreed rules. None of us today can think that the United Nations can fully prevent all wars and conflicts — be they in Ukraine, the Middle East, Africa or elsewhere. The reason, however, is not some kind of alleged dysfunction of the Organization and its agencies. Rather, it is the lack of joint political will in its highest organ, the Security Council.
On the other hand, it is a fact that the United Nations was born with powerful and exclusive checks, without effective balances. For years, there has been a general understanding that the United Nations needs deep reform, and Slovakia stands ready to continue assisting that legitimate effort. We see that we must look for effective prevention management and, eventually, solutions to conflicts within local or continental alliances. The role of the United Nations remains central, but the need for partnership with regional organizations is growing. For us in Europe, it is NATO and the European Union. That is the only way for the United Nations, the foundations of which were laid in the last century, to withstand the threats and challenges of the current one.
I do not find it appropriate or useful to divide the world into a global North and global South, or an East and West. Much more important is to look at who respects our shared rules and obligations and who does not. Who is interested in making them stronger and abiding by them? Who is undermining them or applying double standards? All of us are far from perfect. However, it fills me with hope that those of us who respect our shared values and rules form the vast majority here and that those who despise, systematically ignore, harm or apply those rules only when they come in handy are but a few. It is often the same actors who try to take apart not only the rules, but also the meaning of words. In the flood of information and misinformation that we face today, we must not renounce the truth. The reverse is still the reverse and not the front. A lie is just a lie, not a fact of an alternate reality. Aggression is not defence. Occupation is not brotherly help, liberation or some mythical togetherness. Likewise, war remains war, no matter what euphemism is used. We must not forget that words and those who speak them, including in traditional and social media, remain the most powerful weapons and determiners of good and evil. They can either fortify or disrupt unity and trust in our societies and communities. They can promote tolerance or spread hatred. It is of paramount importance that we speak out against those who abuse words by giving them alternate or even opposite meanings. Promoting information integrity should be high on our priority list.
The global debate on climate change is a good example and proof that we can do that. The denial of climate change and its evidence, endorsed by renowned scientific teams around the world, quite common until recently, is now obscure even in the most marginal opinion groups, in the face of increasingly destructive climate conditions and disasters. Our emissions are already beyond the imaginary line of our commitments under the Paris Agreement, before which we could still significantly slow down what we, humankind, had caused through our activities. Blaming each other will not help either. We had better do what we can. Let us invest part of our personal and political activity into what is already happening with our climate. Mitigating the consequences of hurricanes and floods and extinguishing fires, both figuratively and, unfortunately, also literally is today’s urgent climate agenda.
Freedom, human rights and human dignity for everyone must be protected. Efforts to reduce poverty and threats to food security must be undertaken. We must improve health, hygiene and vaccination standards, environmental protection, the preservation of ecosystems and diversity. Here, along with climate change mitigation, I see a huge area of action for the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Practical and well-directed policies, the coordination of various national development and assistance programmes into regional synergies and successes, as well as comprehensive and expert evaluations of green transition efforts are what I expect from the United Nations of today.
I am proud that Slovakia belongs not only to Europe but also, globally, to the group of leaders in compliance with the joint climate commitments. I believe that the United Nations should also pay much more attention to the technological and digital aspects of our lives. Today that is almost as important as our physical identities. What I have in mind is no global regulation. That is a task for regional actors. I am thinking, rather, of the widest possible incorporation of new technologies into everything that the United Nations has been working on. My point is that the whole world should benefit more evenly from technological progress. It should become one of the main engines of social progress and the way to level differences and promote gender equality. All of that is also a part of the basic mission of the United Nations.
Another pressing problem facing many countries and the entire international community is migration. It is a phenomenon that divides rather than unites us, an agenda on which elections are won or lost today. However, we should never forget that most of our ancestors across Europe were refugees, too, when they fled before war, poverty or persecution during Nazism or communism. There is no magic formula for addressing illegal migration. It is, however, clear that many aspects of migration need clear rules, transparent procedures and effective policies, as well as measures that will help the source, transit and target countries. And it is also legitimate to appropriately address all security risks that illegal migration, in particular, brings. What we need in the first place is a calm, pragmatic and realistic dialogue leading to cooperation among all concerned parties that not only deals with the consequences but, above all, the causes of illegal migration, as well as those who aid and profit from it.
Slovakia has long been an active member of the United Nations. In the spirit of all the issues, priorities and challenges that I mentioned today, Slovakia is preparing its candidacy for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council for the period of 2028–2029. Our diplomats and experts are sitting on the executive boards of several specialized United Nations agencies. The roots of Czechoslovak — and today’s Slovak — diplomacy are closely linked with international cooperation. Names like Milan Rastislav Štefánik, Štefan Osuský, Ivan Krno or Ján Papánek are well-known in the diplomatic community, and some of them left a strong footprint here in the United Nations corridors as well. The last one, Ján Papánek, was Czechoslovakia’s delegate at the San Francisco Conference and was one of the 14 people who formulated the final text of the Charter that gave birth to this Organization.
All those prominent Slovak diplomats had one thing in common: they were all true and convinced multilateralists. And it is to multilateralism that we, to a large extent, owe our modern statehood and identity. It is therefore up to us, the leaders of this world, to stress in communication to our citizens that the building blocks and rules of the international community that we have been laying together for almost eight decades since 1945 have no sustainable alternative. It is our task to say and repeat that we must not bring them down but, on the contrary, fix and bolster them. Multilateralism — just like the world around us — is complex and has many diverse and often opposing layers. It requires a lot of patience, and it often brings frustration and bitterness. However, it is also the most precious generational wealth that we can relay to our posterity. It is up to us in what condition we will jointly pass multilateralism on and how well- or ill-prepared for the future it will be.
