A few days ago, we adopted the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1). In these times of wars, climate catastrophes, increasing inequalities and deepening polarization, it was a rare flicker of unity — the unity of countries and groups from all continents. The Pact should represent the start of a new era of global partnership among countries willing to strengthen the multilateral system, with the United Nations at its core.
There was another flicker of hope this week. The Security Council, presided by Slovenia, my home country, adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2024/5) on leadership for peace. All 15 members of the Council reaffirmed their resolve to maintain international peace and security and to commit to international law, including the Charter of the United Nations. It was a good start to re-energizing our collective work for a better, more peaceful and more humane world. Let me address some of the most pressing issues of today, starting with peace and security.
Secretary-General António Guterres, who enjoys our full support and enormous respect, has repeated on several occasions that last year, with the highest number of conflicts in decades, was also the deadliest. Slovenia has been an elected member of the Security Council since January. In that time, we have observed the gradual but steady erosion of the power of rules. The Council is increasingly unable to respond in an effective way to major conflicts, such as those in Gaza, Ukraine and the Sudan. We are not doing any better in the management of other crises.
What we are witnessing in Ukraine is the aggression of a stronger and powerful neighbour upon a smaller and weaker one. That is clearly a blatant violation of the United Nations Charter, and if we allow that aggression pass we will open the door to many similar wars across the globe.
In Gaza, almost four months since the Council’s resolution 2735 (2024) on the ceasefire and hostages, a deal is nowhere in sight. As the Secretary-General said yesterday at the High-Level Ministerial Meeting on the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), people in Gaza,
“are existing — not living, but existing — among lakes of sewage, piles of rubbish and mountains of rubble. The only certainty they have is that tomorrow will be worse”.
In the West Bank and East Jerusalem, violence and the dehumanization of Palestinians are increasing and have reached a boiling point. All of that is taking us further away from the two-State solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side-by side-in peace and security. The escalation of the Gaza crisis into the region is now a reality. The region is at the brink of an abyss. De-escalation is urgently needed, starting with ceasefires in Gaza and Lebanon.
In the Sudan, we are witnessing a man-made humanitarian catastrophe, with millions displaced and in desperate need of humanitarian aid. At the same time, we are seeing atrocities happening again in Darfur.
How is that possible? Has the Security Council really failed humankind? To be honest, it is the five permanent members that bear the most responsibility. By misusing the veto power and putting national interests first, they have effectively blocked the working of the Security Council. The concerns and pain that we feel for civilians and our condemnation of violations of the Charter and of international humanitarian law should not depend on our geographical or political proximity to the conflict. We should all put our common interests first, and the world would be a much better place if we did.
Let me turn to the reform of the Security Council. Our experience in the Security Council has given us renewed appreciation for the need to reform the Council. We urgently need a Council that is a true representation of the international community — a Council that is fit for the world of today. We need to ensure that the distribution of seats is fair. The Council needs stronger voices from regions that have been underrepresented, such as the African continent. The reform of the Council’s composition needs to be accompanied by the reform of the veto powers. The reality is that we will not be able to eliminate the veto, but we could definitely regulate the right of the veto more precisely. The Security Council also needs to exercise its power with higher ambition when it comes to the prevention of conflicts and play a stronger role in peacebuilding activities that involve all aspects of the United Nations system.
Let us not forget that the United Nations is so much more than the Security Council alone. We commend the work of nameless humanitarian workers who are on the ground in armed conflicts, among the civilians, representing the face of the United Nations. The erosion of respect for international humanitarian law is making their work so much more difficult. The Gaza conflict has been, however, a turning point in that regard. In Gaza, humanitarians are not just occasional collateral victims; they seem to have become deliberate military targets. There is no other explanation for the highest number of humanitarian workers being killed last year, of whom the vast majority died in Gaza. The sense of impunity for crimes in Gaza is putting humanitarian organizations under stress elsewhere. That is undermining the very essence of the United Nations and affecting the work of humanitarian organizations and United Nations agencies, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and UNRWA all around the globe.
Another pressing issue is climate change. The impact of climate change is mostly felt on the lifeline for people and nature, that is, water, the most precious of the elements. Extreme weather events are multiplying water-related risks across the world. That global challenge demands a global and collaborative response. Solutions exist but are not equally accessible to everybody.
The Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for All initiative is the right step in that direction. As catastrophic floods devastated my home country last year, we initiated the development of an advanced digital solution linking Earth observation with supercomputing and artificial intelligence. The system will help us predict floods and droughts and improve our resilience. We are ready to share that solution with our partners globally.
Remote sensing and Earth observation inform our early warning systems, but we are fully aware that many countries lack the capacity to monitor all hazards and are restricted in their access. I call upon all to form a global partnership around Early Warnings for All to help overcome those challenges. The partnership would boost our common preparedness and ensure that everyone on Earth is protected from hazardous weather, water or climate events through life-saving early warning systems.
Unfortunately, people suffering from armed conflicts do not have the luxury of high-tech solutions. More often than not, they are denied basic access to clean drinking water. Worse yet, we are increasingly seeing how access to water is becoming weaponized in Yemen, Somalia, Gaza and the Sudan. Slovenia decided to take initiative and launched the Global Alliance to Spare Water from Armed Conflicts, together with a cross-regional group of countries. Such global partnerships are urgently needed to safeguard the human right to water for all.
Last but not least, I turn to humanity. We need to make sure that people around the world age with dignity and rights. Current international human rights law offers only a fragmented and inconsistent framework for the full protection of the human rights of older persons. That is why we are leading a global action towards a legally binding instrument on human rights of older persons.
The world should waste no time in addressing the main issues related to gender equality, including the future development and implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. The United Nations should lead by example when it comes to the full, equal and meaningful role and leadership of women in our societies. In its entire history, the General Assembly has been led by only four women. We have never had a female Secretary-General. The time has come to reflect gender equality in top leadership positions of our Organization. Slovenia has joined the supporters of the Rotation for Equality initiative, which calls for gender rotation in the position of President of the General Assembly.
In times of crisis, children are always the most vulnerable. Today’s world is increasingly hostile to children’s rights. More children than ever are experiencing violence in all settings, many have lost their lives or have been forcibly displaced, exposed to the most traumatic experiences, imprisoned, denied education and health care or face extreme poverty and social exclusion.
Gaza is an example of the extreme suffering of children. Slovenia is offering concrete help with the Let Them Dream Foundation, which is dealing with the rehabilitation of children from Gaza. It is an extremely noble and humane project that was launched years ago and has already helped hundreds of children from Gaza who have come to Slovenia for rehabilitation and will continue to do so. Sadly, some of those kids were the victims of the recent aggression on Gaza.
Let me finish with the story of the two young girls from Palestine. At the beginning of this week, I attended an event on missing futures in the occupied Palestinian territory, organized by Save the Children. At that event, I heard stories from two courageous Palestinian girls, Sara and Rand. They spoke about their challenges in life, they spoke about their feelings and they spoke about their plans for the future. In spite of all the destruction, dehumanization and fear, there was no anger or hatred in their stories. They just had an enormous wish to live a normal, decent life. They just had an enormous wish to be able to study and educate themselves in order to be able to give back to their community. One wants to become a doctor; the other wants to become a humanitarian worker.
Today, I fulfil my promise to them and bring their story to the General Assembly. Only with our united call for peace and against war will we make sure that Sara, Rand and all the other children of Palestine and the world are not among the thousands missing their futures like children under occupation.
I want to say this out loud and clearly to the Israeli Government — stop the bloodshed, stop the suffering, bring the hostages home and end the occupation. Mr. Netanyahu must stop the war now.
