We are gathered in the General Assembly while the world and the Organization are facing major and existential challenges. We are gathered while we are witnessing an unprecedented number of armed conflicts, from Ukraine to the Sudan, the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gaza. We are gathered while we are failing in our collective goal of maintaining international peace and security and of saving future generations from the horrors of war and the disastrous consequences of underdevelopment and climate change.
The Charter of the United Nations, the sovereign equality of all States, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition of the threat or use of force against any State are being challenged. We must stand by the Charter. Sweden’s strong defence of international law, including the Charter, is based on the understanding that both our own security and that of other countries depends on it. Ensuring respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of all States, both large and small, is in our common interest. At its core lies the need for a global system that is open, predictable and applies equally to all. In too many places around the world, including Sweden’s immediate neighbourhood, we are witnessing the consequences of violations of the rules and principles to which we have all agreed.
Since the start of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine in 2014 and with the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Russia has brutally invaded the territory of another Member State. The Assembly has strongly and repeatedly condemned Russia’s aggression against Ukraine as a blatant violation of international law, including the United Nations Charter. If a member of the Security Council is allowed to reap the fruits of aggression, the harmful impact will not stop with Ukraine. Russia’s leadership will continue its attempts to impose its rule on neighbouring countries. The territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States must serve as a basis for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine. That was confirmed at the Summit on Peace in Ukraine in Switzerland in June, which gathered some 100 delegations from all continents. Ukraine has made clear from the start that it wants a peaceful settlement based on the Charter of the United Nations. As President Zelenskyy rightfully said in his speech before the Assembly yesterday (see A/79/ PV.9), there can be no just peace without Ukraine. Sweden’s steadfast support for Ukraine’s efforts to restore its sovereignty and territorial integrity will continue for as long as it takes.
As a direct response to Russia’s full-scale invasion, Sweden and Finland chose to join NATO. On Sweden’s part, that represents a truly historic change, ending 200 years of military non-alignment. That was our decision to make, because it is the right of each State to choose its own security policy path. Sweden’s NATO membership gives us a new, crucial platform to defend the fundamental values of our foreign and security policy. We will apply the same principled approach in NATO as we do in the United Nations, the European Union (EU), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe. In other words, we will continue to defend international law, democracy, individual freedoms, human rights and gender equality.
Sweden has always defended the universal principles of sovereignty and the right to self-determination. In fact, Sweden has consistently supported countries struggling for liberty, independence and democracy, not least in Africa, and we continue to be an engaged partner of African countries. To take just one example, I am deeply concerned about the situation in the Sudan. More than 10 million people have been displaced, which roughly corresponds to the entire population of my own country. Safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access, an immediate ceasefire and negotiations ensuring a return to civilian rule are urgently required. The Sudan is therefore among the countries receiving the most humanitarian support from Sweden this year. Sweden remains a key partner of and donor to United Nations humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Similarly, Sweden supports the ongoing peace efforts by the United Nations in Yemen, where we will continue to work with our partners for a principled and inclusive humanitarian response. The people of Yemen are looking to the international community for hope and a way out of humanitarian despair. We must answer that call.
We are also faced with the threat of a regional war, the consequences of which no one can predict. My country’s long-standing commitment to peace efforts in the Middle East dates back to 1948 and the efforts of United Nations mediator Folke Bernadotte. Today Sweden is one of the largest core donors to United Nations agencies and other organizations working to mitigate the immense suffering of the civilian population of Gaza. At the same time, Sweden stands up for Israel’s right to defend itself in accordance with international law, and we demand that the hostages be released. Israel is being threatened by Iran and its allies simultaneously on several fronts. Hizbullah’s repeated attacks since 8 October 2023 have led to a dangerous military escalation. Sweden fully supports the efforts of the United States, France and others to reach a diplomatic solution. A ceasefire would provide space for reaching a diplomatic settlement consistent with Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and the implementation of Security Council resolution 2735 (2024) on a ceasefire in Gaza. In the longer term, Sweden, like the EU and the United States, believes in the idea of a two-State solution, whereby Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side in peace, freedom and democracy.
In order to address global challenges, we must ensure that our aid helps to mobilize additional resources, not least private capital. Development assistance alone is not enough to build long-term wealth and welfare. It must go hand in hand with democracy, the rule of law, market development, trade, investments and technology transfer. We see that clearly in the countries now leaving poverty behind. We must also redouble our efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Sweden is one of the world’s most generous donors of development assistance. Through our development assistance, we are accelerating the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. To achieve that, strong national ownership in partner countries and a broader approach to development cooperation among donors is needed. We must also step up the fight against corruption so that economic growth benefits the whole of society, not just the few.
I can only note that women are underrepresented as speakers this week, at the general debate. Women make up 50 per cent of the world’s population, yet only 10 per cent of speakers this week are women. There is, one could say, a lot of room for improvement in that regard. I agree with the Secretary-General that global opposition to gender equality is on the rise. That is why gender equality is a core value in Sweden’s foreign policy. Let me say this: countries that stand up for women’s and girls’ rights not only are champions of freedom and human rights but also benefit from broad labour market participation and economic growth. Respect for human rights, the provision of sexual and reproductive health and rights services and the empowerment of young girls and women are tangible contributions to advancing gender equality. That is what I want for the future of my daughter, Kajsa, and for the daughters of others too.
Simply put, our free society must stand up against those who wish to exploit our freedom in order to restrict the freedom of others. Everyone must be able to live safely and freely, regardless of religious beliefs or personal convictions, regardless of skin colour and regardless of whom they love. That is of such importance to my Government that we have begun work on an action plan for equal rights and opportunities for LGBTQI people.
The green and digital transition offers vast opportunities in terms of new jobs, increased growth and improved livelihoods. Sweden aims to become climate neutral by 2045, at the latest. As early movers, we want to show that it is possible to reduce emissions while maintaining economic growth. At the same time, global ambitions on climate action and climate financing must be raised. Here too, we are increasing our support even further and enhancing its effect by advancing innovative financial models to mobilize more private capital.
The many crises in our world today have shed a harsh light on the need for reforms of our multilateral system. We need global governance structures that can withstand the challenges of our time and that are resilient to malevolent attempts to undermine the Charter of the United Nations. Action, implementation and follow-up must be our approach as we look forward and take stock of the Summit of the Future and the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) adopted at it.
The United Nations Security Council, the body entrusted with the ultimate responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, must be effective, transparent and accountable. Sweden supports a balanced expansion of the Security Council to better reflect current global, political and economic realities. That can be achieved by such means as adding new permanent and non-permanent seats, including for African countries. Sweden also supports the ongoing reform processes in multilateral development banks to increase the effectiveness and scale of financing with a view to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and implementing the Paris Agreement.
Another area in which strengthened global governance is essential is outer space. Modern societies are becoming more and more dependent on space services, and the space environment is becoming increasingly congested and contested. Sweden is strongly committed to preventing an arms race in outer space and to safeguarding the use of space for peaceful purposes. That includes all States’ full compliance with existing international law, including the Outer Space Treaty. We will continue to promote the development of norms and rules for responsible behaviour in space.
Together with Zambia, Sweden is proud to have co-facilitated the Global Digital Compact. Through that framework, all Member States have committed to strengthen international cooperation to close digital divides among and within countries and to establish the governance required for a sustainable digital future, including with respect to artificial intelligence. Rest assured, Sweden will continue to fulfil its responsibility and to be an active, engaged and constructive multilateral actor. We will continue to be a close but demanding partner of the United Nations. We will constructively demand more — more efficiency, more coherence, more impact and more innovation. That is how we will achieve our shared ambitions for the future, together.
This is a moment of major existential challenges, but we must not allow anything to stop us from defending the fundamental principles that form the foundations of the Organization. It is true that there are areas in which international law needs to be developed to meet new challenges. However, it is equally true that hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty on the basis of the norms, purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Global health and well-being have reached unprecedented levels. People across the globe are enjoying justice, peace, freedom and prosperity at levels unimaginable to previous generations. It is a legacy to be proud of and one that we must all do everything that we can to uphold.
