I would first of all like to extend my congratulations to Ambassador Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at this seventy-ninth session. I also want to thank Ambassador Francis for his diligent leadership during the seventy-eighth session.
As the highest representatives of the peoples of the world, we meet here every year in this institution, which promises to deliver peace, progress and prosperity for all. We must be frank — frank in our assessment of what we are doing for the people whom we represent and whose interests we serve. When it comes to my people of the Seychelles, we must be critical of our approach to the challenges of today and plan for the challenges of tomorrow.
The world is less secure than it was even just a year ago. While at the time we hoped that existing conflicts could be resolved, we now find ourselves in a situation that is more tense and precarious. Flames stoked by competition and distrust threaten to engulf those who have no part in those conflicts, leaving us in the grip of a fearful atmosphere of instability, which is exacerbated by the worry that warfare could spread. We are in danger of losing sight of the values that bring us together, that transcend borders and cultures and that are understood in all languages and present in all ideologies. We must revert to our foundational principles of dialogue and cooperation. Without a stable foundation, we cannot build our vision of a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world. Our focus has been diverted from the challenges requiring our urgent and undivided attention — challenges affecting the core of people’s lives and requiring solutions with people at their centre, such as addressing the climate crisis, ending poverty and hunger and ensuring that all have the indisputable right to a decent and dignified life. Our people have entrusted us with the task of working together to find solutions.
Seventy-nine years ago, the permanent members of the Security Council conferred on themselves the great responsibility of ensuring international peace and security and cooperating in good faith to save future generations from the transgressions of the past. With that great responsibility came the expectation that gross violations of the Charter of the United Nations would be dealt with resolutely and impartially. We placed our trust in them to act in the common interest, prevent conflict and preserve human dignity. The consequences of conflict are felt beyond the direct and intolerable suffering of victims in war zones and those displaced by fighting. In a very interconnected world, we are all subjected to inflationary pressures, elevated commodity and energy prices and other disruptive effects. Widened and prolonged conflict risks affecting smaller States like Seychelles, which are trying not to get caught in the crossfire. It is not our intention to lecture the world Powers or to attempt to prescribe solutions for complex issues. We simply wish to remind the Council members of their duty and that they should assure us that geopolitics will not supersede human rights and international law.
Since its formation in 1946, the Security Council has remained largely unchanged. At the time most of Africa was under colonial rule. Seychelles joins the call for the United Nations and the Security Council to deliver the reform that so many have called for, with the goal not of hindering its work but of bringing inclusivity and perspective. It is time to correct one of the many injustices that Africa has been subjected to. Permanent membership of the world’s primary peacekeeping institution is a necessity. The Council’s consideration of critical issues, such as the matter of rising sea levels that Malta raised last year (see S/PV.9260) and the broader climate-security nexus, has proved that it is capable of reflecting new realities. The proposal by the United States to include a rotating seat for small island developing States is a welcome and progressive one.
Climate change remains the foremost challenge facing humankind, and failure to address its effects will devastate current and future generations. As a small island State, Seychelles understands what it means to be vulnerable. That vulnerability that cannot be ignored when it comes to the future we see for ourselves. We are on the front lines of the climate crisis, which poses irreversible threats to our people, our economy and our way of life. Rising sea levels, extreme weather events and the degradation of our oceans are stark reminders of the urgent need for global action on climate change. We have all made commitments, pledges and promises to achieve large-scale reductions of emissions, keep alive the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5℃, boosting adaptation to deal with extreme weather disasters and building resilience for addressing future impacts. But words are nothing without deeds, and we have to act urgently and in unity in order to make the necessary transition to a more sustainable future. It is a conscious and intentional choice to continue down that path and decide that business as usual in pursuit of short-term goals is acceptable.
World military expenditure has increased for the tenth consecutive year, reaching $2.5 trillion in 2023, which makes even the highest estimates of the funds needed for loss and damage — $100 billion — seem modest and insignificant. That is a worrisome reflection of the world’s priorities. It is unfair for small island developing States (SIDS) to suffer the consequences of those choices. We simply do not have the means to cope with the disastrous effects of climate change. In that context, I want to thank those who have contributed to the loss and damage fund. The pledges made following the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change should not be mere attempts to pacify those of us who have been calling for remediation. We hope to take it as a token of ongoing commitment and continued action, given the expected rise in the costs of dealing with climate change. As the Secretary-General said yesterday (see A/79/ PV.7), those who shoulder the blame should foot the bill.
The international community cannot hope to advance sustainable development when some race ahead while others are left to struggle. No one should be left behind, lest we abandon future generations to a bleaker world. The obligations outlined in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change are the lifelines that would give us a chance if all States did their utmost to adhere to them. Our reliance on fossil fuels is unsustainable and detrimental. We must accelerate the energy transition towards renewables and mobilize investment in the related technology and infrastructure if we are to have any prospect of real energy security. Seychelles’ focus remains on nature-based solutions to combat climate change while ensuring economic sustainability and environmental preservation. Our blue bonds demonstrate the potential for harnessing capital markets in order to finance the sustainable use of marine resources.
But ambitious and innovative strategies for securing long-term economic development are futile without finance that is accessible and sustainable. The average ratio of debt to gross domestic product in SIDS exceeds 70 per cent. It is crippling, and it impedes our development by diverting critical resources from where they are needed most — infrastructure, education and healthcare. Our vulnerabilities have expanded, but our borrowing costs remain high. Instead of being granted concessions, we are penalized for our vulnerability. It is time to move beyond discussion and implement real reforms in the international financial system to address the fact that some vulnerable countries, regardless of their income status, are precluded from opportunities to meet development needs. We must also recognize the humanitarian consequences of economic policies. Our work in the multilateral system is undermined by unilateral coercive measures that are intended to leave economies crippled and Governments unable to enhance their own people’s dignity.
The multilateral system remains our best hope for addressing the challenges we face. As a small State, Seychelles believes in the United Nations, for we fear a reality with no alternative. In a world that is more interconnected than ever, multilateralism is the network that links our shared values to achieve the vision that we have for our world, one that is defined by our common interests and not our differences. We are here to solve problems, not to exacerbate them, to listen and not to dismiss. We put our faith in this institution because we must prove to the world that we can work for it, but it is up to us to make it work. In 2023, we adopted the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, and this year Seychelles became the twelfth State in the world and the first in Africa to ratify it. We urge other countries to ratify it as soon as possible so as not to delay its entry into force.
This year’s fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States in Antigua and Barbuda shone a timely light on the challenges that we face in a global economic landscape that we are ill equipped to navigate. The Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for Small Island Developing States has provided a blueprint for action over the next decade, and we call on the international community to commit to its implementation. The multidimensional vulnerability index resolution adopted here last month (resolution 78/322) also represents a triumph of the multilateral system in considering new approaches to complex and evolving issues. Its data and findings deliver the empirical grounding for what we know to be true, which is that a single-layered approach to development is no longer accurate or adequate. A better understanding of precisely those multidimensional vulnerabilities will be crucial to the decisions that we take, and more importantly, those taken on our behalf.
The Pact for the Future that the Assembly has just adopted (resolution 79/1) should rightly usher in a new era of engagement based on mutual interest and mutual respect. We must use it to bridge divisions between nations on critical issues of human rights, gender equality and the rule of law. The new era must accelerate the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and shape the international financial system more fairly so that it can adapt responses to global crises in a more coordinated way and restore peace, with a promise to preserve it in future.
For Seychelles, the Declaration on Future Generations should signal our commitment to safeguarding the rights of all the people who will be born by the end of this century, most of them in developing countries — people who should not be born into hardship. We must envision a world where survival is not a struggle, a world that ensures everyone’s right to prosperity. Basic rights should not be difficult to provide.
I firmly believe that those are the foundations on which our cooperation and progress should be built — the things that our people need most and that should guide us towards building a world that is more secure and sustainable. Let us strive to be the architects of a world where no one is left behind.
