I congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its current session, and I thank your predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for presiding over the previous session. I also thank the Secretary-General for his efforts to fulfil his mandate under the provisions of Charter of the United Nations.
As this session of the General Assembly begins, international tensions have reached a boiling point and efforts to maintain international peace and security are confronted by real challenges and threats. Clashes are growing fierce, crises are multiplying, conflicts are escalating, chaos is spreading, terrorism is gaining ground, the global economy is faltering, poverty rates are rising, climate change is accelerating, and development indicators are lagging. Those are the unfortunate results of the eight decades of multilateral action that have followed the establishment of the United Nations.
While we previously sought to promote preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes, today we are witnessing more direct wars and proxy wars waged through investment in terrorist tools. Instead of reaping the fruits of scientific progress to serve human civilization and the well-being of all people, we are witnessing the disgraceful use of modern technologies as deadly tools to sow death and destruction. Instead of investing efforts and resources in achieving sustainable development for all, we see some persisting in policies that plunder nations of their resources, rob peoples of their wealth and impose unilateral coercive measures that impoverish populations and devastate their lives.
For more than a decade now, Syria has experienced unparalleled suffering. It fell victim to a fierce terrorist war, direct aggression on its territories that continue to this day, a suffocating multidimensional economic blockade in various forms and unprecedented political and media incitement. Billions of dollars have been spent to demolish development achievements, spread chaos and undermine security and stability and to force millions of Syrians to leave their homes, only to become internally displaced or refugees in other countries. Nevertheless, Members may rest assured that all of this has failed to make Syria abandon our strong beliefs, our firm positions and the resolute national choices we have made. Syria has never hesitated to protect and defend its people and never faltered in its decision to defeat terrorism. Economic hardships have not prevented us from meeting the needs of our people. All that has happened has unequivocally exposed the true intentions of the collective West’s policies against Syria, which completely contradict the principles and purposes that formed the founding pillars and functions of the international Organization.
Israel’s ongoing occupation of Arab territories since 1967, including the Syrian Arab Golan, and the genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity it commits are a glaring example of the failure of the Organization, and the Security Council in particular, to end that expansionist and racist occupation and ongoing aggression. It is damning proof that the United States has prevented the Council from fulfilling its responsibility to confront threats to international peace and security.
Since 7 October 2023, the Israeli occupation has continued to commit bloody and terrorist crimes, adding another chapter to its seven-decades criminal record. In recent months, the occupying forces and settler gangs have been carrying out a savage aggression against the Palestinian people and, before the eyes of the entire world, committing genocide that has claimed the lives of more than 42,000 Palestinians, most of them children and women.
The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people and reiterates its solidarity with their legitimate struggle to liberate their occupied land and establish their independent State on their entire national territory, with Jerusalem as its capital, while ensuring the right of Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland, in line with international law and relevant United Nations resolutions. Syria also condemns all attempts to liquidate the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and suspend the services it provides to Palestinians in their land and in neighbouring countries. We stress the need to hold Israel accountable for the war crimes it is committing, including its deliberate targeting of more than 200 personnel working for UNRWA and other United Nations and humanitarian agencies.
In an attempt to conceal the failure of their war against the Palestinians and to fend off their own internal crisis, the Israeli occupying forces have chosen to drag the region into a serious escalation, while benefiting from the immunity, impunity and unlimited support provided by certain Western countries, in particular the United States, in a clear case of hypocrisy and double standards. Israeli forces have scaled up their attacks on countries of the region, including my country, Syria, targeting vital civilian facilities, residential buildings and even diplomatic premises, resulting in the death of dozens of civilians and significant material damage and hindering the delivery humanitarian aid to Syrians.
On 27 July, Israeli occupying forces committed another heinous crime against our people in the occupied Syrian Golan when they targeted the Syrian town of Majdal Shams, claiming the lives of 12 Syrian children. The criminal Israeli forces went even further, blaming others for that tragedy and exploiting the death of innocent Syrians for propaganda purposes. The open Israeli aggression has also been extended to our brotherly Lebanon. Two weeks ago, the Israeli occupation authorities committed an unprecedented crime against the Lebanese by using communications technology as a tool to collectively kill unarmed civilians. A few days ago, the Israeli occupation authorities targeted the southern suburb of Beirut with a treacherous and cowardly aggression, destroying an entire residential block and using tons of explosive bombs to assassinate Hizbullah Secretary-General Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah, who for more than three decades led the honourable Lebanese national resistance against the Israeli occupation.
That large-scale Israeli aggression, which is unfettered by any restriction or limitation, is pushing the region to the brink of a dangerous escalation and confrontation whose consequences cannot be predicted, with disastrous effect on peace and security not only in our region, but also beyond. The Syrian Arab Republic calls on all States Members of the United Nations to work to end the Israeli aggression against Palestine, Syria and Lebanon, hold the occupation authorities accountable for their crimes and prevent impunity.
The Syrian Arab Republic unequivocally reiterates that the Golan is occupied Syrian territory and that its inhabitants are Syrian Arab citizens who are and will always be an integral part of the people of Syria. They have struggled for decades against the occupation. Syria reaffirms that recovering the occupied Syrian Golan, in line with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), is an inalienable right that shall never be subject to compromise, affected by the passage of time or be subject to the statute of limitations.
The crimes and continued attacks of the Israeli occupying forces against Syria cannot be uncoupled from the subversive role played by certain Western countries, especially the United States, in my country, Syria. Those countries have continued to violate Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity by illegally deploying their military forces inside Syria’s territory, allowing their officials to infiltrate Syria and supporting separatist militias and terrorist groups. Those countries have also worked to exacerbate the humanitarian situation of the Syrian people by depriving them of the benefit of their resources as a result of their systematic looting of Syria’s national riches and by imposing unilateral coercive measures whose disastrous effects have touched all aspects of the daily lives of Syrians. Those measures have targeted various vital sectors, most notably public health, energy, banking and financial transfers. They have also targeted the transportation and agricultural sectors, leading to a decline in food security rates.
All the unfounded allegations made by Western countries to justify such illegal measures and to deny or downplay their catastrophic impacts have been laid bare in multiple recent United Nations reports. In that context, Syria demands once again the immediate, full and unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures, which amount to the collective punishment of people, a form of economic terrorism and a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and international law.
Since the beginning of the terrorist war on Syria, the Syrian Government has responsibly and constructively engaged with all initiatives aimed at supporting efforts to preserve Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, protect its people from terrorists and improve the living conditions of Syrians. Many measures have been taken to that end, which can be summed up as follows.
First, we have mobilized all efforts to eradicate terrorist groups designated by the Security Council and to put a halt to their dark philosophy, extremist ideology and practices based on killing, torture, enforced disappearance, restriction of freedoms, the recruitment of children, discrimination and violence against women and girls. The Syrian Government continues to confront the remaining organizations with a view to ending the suffering of Syrians and calls on all countries to repatriate those of their citizens who are currently detained in illegal centres in north-eastern Syria and to close those facilities in the light of the potential danger they pose.
Second, we are pursuing national reconciliation and local settlement agreements. Twenty-three amnesty decrees have been issued, facilitating the proper social reintegration of those who had lost their way. The most recent of these was legislative decree No. 27 of 22 September.
Third, we are supporting and facilitating humanitarian access, inter alia, by granting the United Nations multiple authorizations to use three border crossings to deliver humanitarian assistance to eligible Syrian civilians in north-western Syria and by granting the necessary approvals for humanitarian deliveries from inside Syria, despite all attempts by terrorist groups to obstruct humanitarian access and steal or divert the aid.
Four, Syrian State institutions continue to work to enhance their role and increase their efficiency by delivering all constitutionally mandated entitlements in a timely manner, following up on the process of economic and administrative development and reform, and moving forward with efforts to modernize legislative structures, including those related to strengthening the rule of law, developing media work and social protection programmes, empowering women, protecting the rights of children and persons with disabilities, implementing the strategic plan for gender equality and developing legislation regulating conscription.
Fifth, we are sparing no effort to support the dignified return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes. An agreement has been reached with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on several measures that are currently being implemented diligently. Discussions are also ongoing with certain neighbouring countries to launch innovative projects, which could be a model to facilitate and accelerate return.
Sixth, we are openly engaging with all efforts and initiatives made at the political level, including by taking part in the Astana meetings, which have achieved concrete results. The Syrian Government is also in constant contact with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and is cooperating with him, in line with his mandated role as a facilitator of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process.
Seventh, we are committed to dialogue and diplomacy as a basis for correcting relations with other countries. The Syrian Government has engaged positively with the various initiatives put forward in that regard out of its firm belief that building sound relations based on specific principles and clear grounds ensures the achievement of the desired results, in particular mutual respect for States’ sovereignty and territorial unity, joint action to address all threats to security and stability, and the pursuit of common interests without interfering in internal affairs.
As Syria heals the wounds of what it has been exposed to, it looks to the future with a sense of hope and optimism. However, the success of its efforts necessarily requires the collective West to stop politicizing humanitarian work and linking it to political conditionality. Donors need to fulfil their pledges of humanitarian funding and provide sustainable solutions for livelihoods and support for resilience, including by working to strengthen and increase early recovery projects in quantity and quality, and for the immediate, complete and unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures.
Syria reiterates its demand for a Middle East zone free of all weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and for Israel to be compelled to join relevant international treaties and conventions and place its installations under international monitoring.
Syria expresses its support for and solidarity with Arab countries, especially those facing challenging circumstances resulting from foreign interference in their affairs, natural events or climate change.
Syria reiterates its support for the right of the Russian Federation to defend itself and to preserve its national security in response to the West’s hostile policies and in rejection of the logic of hegemony and unipolarity. Syria also condemns attempts t o confiscate Russian financial assets.
Syria expresses once again its full support for the Islamic Republic of Iran’s legitimate right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We commend Iran’s constructive and responsible approach in that regard.
Syria renews its support for the one China principle and the stances of the People’s Republic of China as it faces external attempts to interfere in its internal affairs. We stress China’s inalienable right to take the measures and steps it deems necessary to defend its sovereignty.
Syria condemns the United States’ decades-long economic embargo on Cuba and rejects the issuance of the infamous list of so-called State sponsors of terrorism. Syria calls for an end to the United States military drills and exercises on the Korean peninsula, as they contribute to raising tensions in that region. My country reiterates its solidarity with Venezuela in the face of the flagrant interference in its internal affairs and the hostile policies against it.
Syria calls for the immediate lifting of all unilateral coercive measures imposed by Western countries on Russia, Iran, Venezuela, Belarus, Cuba, Nicaragua, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea and others, as well as on my country, Syria.
In conclusion, I call on the countries of the world to muster the courage and make the right choice to guarantee a better present and future for current and future generations; to save humankind from the scourge of all-out wars looming on the horizon by reforming international political and financial institutions; and to end the state of hegemony and unipolarity and deter attempts to undermine the United Nations Charter and replace it with the so-called rules-based order.
The Syrian Arab Republic looks forward to seeing the current session of the General Assembly, under your leadership, Sir, fulfil the promise of its theme and stresses that success in translating that theme into practical reality will require the abandoning of policies of hegemony, exclusion, blockade and collective punishment of peoples, adherence to the Charter of our Organization, respect for international law and multilateral diplomacy, and the granting to developing countries of equal opportunities to advance their societies and achieve well-being, prosperity and sustainable development for their peoples.
