At the outset, on behalf of the President of the Republic of Chad and my delegation and in my own name, I would like to extend my warmest congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang on his outstanding election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I wish him every success in his mission and assure him of the support of the Chadian delegation throughout his term.
I would also like to express our sincere thanks and warm congratulations to Mr. Dennis Francis, outgoing President of the General Assembly, for the excellent work he accomplished during his term.
I would further like to convey my very high appreciation and full support to Secretary-General António Guterres for his leadership and his commitment to a renewed United Nations capable of meeting the expectations of the peoples of the world.
The theme of this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development, and human dignity for present and future generations”, resonates deeply with the aspirations and challenges we face in Chad, Africa and around the world. The promotion of peace, sustainable development and human dignity must not remain a slogan or a rhetorical exercise. This session must encourage us to act with determination and compassion to build together a just and peaceful world where every individual and community can prosper in dignity.
For Chad, my country, as for many countries of the Sahel, peace remains a crucial issue. Although we face challenges, it is essential to recognize the efforts made by our States in the face of terrorist groups, whose origins and resources remain obscure and which threaten our institutions, hamper our development efforts and exacerbate the misery of our populations. The lack of real will within the international community to eradicate the terrorist disaster in the Sahel risks placing the whole of Africa under the control of terrorist groups. We are convinced that the firm commitment of the international community is necessary to face the challenge. Together, we must win the fight against terrorism by strengthening our cooperation to promote the stability of our continent and, thus, that of the common destiny of humankind.
In 2030, we will jointly assess the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Chad, like many African countries, is at a crossroads where multiple challenges converge, including the climate change that is threatening our food security. Prolonged droughts, desertification and unpredictable floods are undermining our economies and vulnerable populations. We therefore call on the international community to honour its commitments in terms of financing, climate justice and the transfer of green technologies.
Chad, under the leadership of President Mahamat Idriss Déby Itno, democratically elected on the basis of a structured, ambitious political programme that I have the great honour of representing at the seventy-ninth session, is working tirelessly to improve access to education, drinking water, energy, health care and economic opportunities. We must combat poverty and inequality, especially gender-based inequality, by building a renewed global partnership that recognizes the specific needs of the least developed countries and commits to full inclusion. We call for equitable access to vaccines and cutting-edge medical technologies, because health and education are the foundations of human dignity. We are also determined to promote social inclusion, the empowerment of women and young people and the protection of human rights. In that regard, the support of the international community is crucial.
The future we shape today will determine the world we want to leave to future generations. In Chad, our young people, representing more than 65 per cent of the population, are our greatest wealth. We invest in their education and their participation in political life to prevent their instrumentalization by radicalism and violent extremism. Furthermore, we call on the United Nations to support an open labour market and to ensure an environment conducive to the development of youth. The immigration of African young people is explained by the great divide that separates our States, whereas we have a common destiny.
As part of our domestic policy, we are proud of our political transition, crowned by free, democratic and transparent elections that resulted in the election of the President of the Republic, Mr. Mahamat Idriss Déby Itno, to the supreme office of our country for a five-year term on 6 May. That turning point demonstrates our commitment to peaceful, democratic and inclusive management of the country, thus strengthening our democracy.
Climate change also represents a major global challenge, with devastating consequences in vulnerable regions such as the Sahel. The recent floods in my country, affecting more than one and a half million people, illustrate that reality. Given the magnitude of the situation, we call for international solidarity to address the emergency. At the same time, our country is hosting more than 2 million refugees, equivalent to approximately 15 per cent of our population. The situation weighs heavily on our resources and exacerbates the humanitarian emergency. That high number is explained by a massive influx of Sudanese refugees as a consequence of the crisis in their country, in addition to the hundreds of thousands of refugees from other neighbouring countries. We call for increased solidarity from the international community to support the refugees and the host populations.
The continuation of hostilities in the Sudan is prolonging the suffering of the Sudanese civilian population and worsening the humanitarian situation both in the combat zones and in neighbouring countries, such as Chad, which continue to see new refugees arriving every day. Chad deplores the fact that the numerous calls for a ceasefire are not being heard by the warring parties. My country is deeply concerned by the ongoing clashes in the Sudan, which are intensifying the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and its repercussions on neighbouring countries, including Chad. Chad reiterates once again its urgent appeal to the parties to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities, facilitate unhindered humanitarian access to the millions of victims of that fratricidal war and resume political dialogue. Chad remains convinced that the current crisis in the Sudan can be resolved not by arms but by peaceful means, through an inter-Sudanese dialogue with a view to lasting peace. Lastly, Chad reaffirms its support for all ongoing initiatives to restore peace and stability in the Sudan.
With regard to the Libyan crisis, we call on all parties to demonstrate their ability to rise above their own interests in order to break the political impasse in which the country finds itself.
Conflicts are not limited to Africa. The situation in Ukraine, like the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, highlights the dangers of the unjustified violence that claims so many innocent victims, against a backdrop of increasingly heightened geopolitical tensions.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we strongly condemn the violence and abuses committed against innocent civilians and reaffirm our commitment to the two-State solution, as well as the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, while calling for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict. The world cannot remain indifferent and have a clear conscience in the face of the unbearable images coming from the Gaza Strip and other Palestinian localities. The conflict is now spreading to Lebanon, exacerbating the regional situation. The escalation is seriously threatening peace and stability not only in the countries directly involved, but also for the entire region.
Chad calls for the lifting of the embargo on Cuba, which harms its people and hinders its development.
I reaffirm Chad’s commitment to the African Common Position on the reform of the Security Council, as expressed in the Ezulawini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, and appeal to the sense of justice and solidarity of all nations to accelerate that long-sought and long-awaited reform. Africa is asking for nothing more than the reparation of a flagrant injustice caused to an entire continent of more than a billion souls, unjustly deprived of its rightful place in global governance.
The path towards a future of peace, sustainable development and human dignity is fraught with pitfalls, but it is our collective responsibility to chart it.
In conclusion, Chad reiterates its commitment to the ideals and founding principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and urges the international community to strengthen multilateralism in order to build a peaceful, fairer, more equitable and more united world.
