The history of the United Nations is one of trust in collective responses to the most serious crises, but each of us sees that we are today at a crossroads. On the one hand, our multilateral model and our ageing institutions are no longer able to face new challenges that are, let us agree, of unprecedented complexity. On the other hand, our discussions and our multilateral commitments of recent years often remain dead letter. That is why there are real reasons to be worried as we look to the future — worried about the future of our planet, which is rife with complex crises; worried about the future of our young people in view of the challenges they inherit, and I am of course thinking first of environmental challenges; and finally, worried about the future of our institutions, which have not adapted to contemporary realities and no longer fulfil their promise.
We therefore have no choice. We cannot maintain systems that struggle to keep their promises and that no longer reflect the realities of the world. We must engage in a profound transformation. That is why I stand here today with conviction and a clear vision for the future. My conviction is that another path is possible. It is a path where international cooperation is revitalized by becoming more inclusive and more respectful. My vision is that of an Africa that fully assumes its role as a strategic partner in the construction of new rules of global regulation.
My first observation is that my country, Togo, looks to the future with hope and determination. In Togo, we are working for development that must be sustainable, but also equitable and inclusive. To that end, we know that we must build a strong, visionary and protective State. We do so as a nation because it is our responsibility to current and future generations. That involves massive investments in our education and health systems. It involves reducing the digital divide. It also involves our commitment to the ecological transition and our action in favour of gender equality.
My second observation is that looking to the future today means looking to Africa. Our continent is no longer just a developing region; it is quite simply the next engine of global growth because it is in Africa that the world’s young people are and will long continue to be. It is where the strongest development potential for emerging markets linked to technological innovation and entrepreneurship will be found. It is particularly in Africa that the green and blue economy offers significant opportunities for sustainable development. Our continent is rich in natural resources. If harnessed properly, they can transform Africa into a global hub for clean and renewable energy. It is also where we need to experiment with the new partnership models we need, particularly between the private and public sectors.
My third observation is that the response to the challenges of our time requires effective multilateral cooperation. Food, security and ecological challenges go beyond what each country is capable of managing effectively on its own. In addition, such crises are fundamentally asymmetrical. They rapidly and severely impact regions of the world that are not directly responsible for their causes. That is why I reiterate here my deep conviction that, first, in the face of those global threats, there is no better future for current and future generations than in the collective and coordinated action of our States; and secondly, that such collective action must be carried out within renewed global political frameworks.
That is true in particular for our efforts to adapt and build climate resilience. Africa is one of the regions most vulnerable to the effects of climate change, despite the fact that we contribute the least to greenhouse gas emissions. The deleterious effects of climate change in Africa in terms of food security and its migratory consequences can no longer be underestimated. If we are not careful, the environmental issue will be at the origin of large waves of migration towards the North, which clearly makes it a shared problem.
But the need for collective action is also true of the challenge of peace and security, and that challenge, too, can no longer be the burden of Africans alone. In West Africa, we face the persistent threats of terrorism. In my opinion, the response lies in a combination of inclusive dialogues, security reforms and economic development initiatives to eradicate the root causes of violence.
But we will not solve all those challenges alone. Multilateral cooperation is necessary to face the collective threat. We all know that development, climate transition and security have become issues that must be addressed multilaterally, but to do so we must first reinvent our model of international cooperation. That leads me to my last observation.
There will be no strengthened international cooperation without a new partnership model that is more equitable and more respectful of African States. We urgently need to reinvent the model of multilateralism to rebalance efforts in international cooperation. In that context, our continent, Africa, deserves special attention.
First, we need more respect and dignity for African States on the international scene. It is time to recognize that we are strategic actors in our own right, capable of contributing significantly to global efforts for peace, sustainable development and human dignity. Respect for human dignity is not just a principle that must guide all of our daily actions within our borders. Respect for and the dignity of our peoples must be recognized through their representation and especially the weight given to their voice, which must be expressed and respected in international forums.
We also need a new model of international cooperation that relies more broadly on localization. Universal solutions imposed from outside may, it is true, have some virtues, but they have only very partially proven themselves. Despite the efforts of recent years, international aid remains too often disconnected from the needs and capacities to act of the populations that benefit from it. Localization must be a deep commitment to recognizing local expertise by allowing States to play their role in defining priorities and implementing programmes. Togo is determined to be a leading player in that transformation. I appeal to all international actors to support more equitable and respectful cooperation.
Africa is ready. It is ready to play its rightful role on the international stage, but it aspires to be respected, heeded and supported in its efforts in a fair manner. Together, let us work to build a world where every nation and every individual can live with dignity, in harmony with others and with our planet.
