Allow me to begin by congratulating Mr. Philemon Yang on his election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
I am here today representing Thailand’s new Government, led by Prime Minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra, to reiterate Thailand’s determination to continue our people-centred, economic-oriented policies to achieve stability and sustainable development for our people.
In an increasingly fragmented and complex world, Thailand reaffirms our support for a rules-based multilateral system, with the United Nations at its core. When the United Nations was founded seven decades ago, we did not envision challenges from technological disruptions, pandemics and climate crisis. In view of the present realities, the United Nations must step up and respond to the evolving challenges of our times if it so to remain relevant. It must be agile and adaptable to new and emerging threats and to ensure that the multilateral system is fit for purpose. Global governance and the United Nations must undertake comprehensive reforms, including that of the Security Council.
With this year’s Summit of the Future and general debate, Thailand looks to the United Nations we all need — a United Nations with increased convening power to sustain and strengthen international peace and security; a United Nations that effectively addresses global challenges; a United Nations that improves the lives, equality and dignity of people around the world; and a United Nations that speaks for the aspirations and interests of all nations, not just the most powerful.
Thailand believes that in order for the United Nations to truly sustain and strengthen international peace and security, Member States must uphold their disarmament and non-proliferation obligations to rebuild trust and ensure a safe and secure world. Moreover, various flashpoints around the globe continue to challenge the credibility of the United Nations in resolving conflicts. We are deeply concerned about increasing armed conflicts in Ukraine and different parts of the world, as well as the escalating violence and worsening humanitarian situation in Gaza. Those situations have far-reaching implications for any smaller nation. Therefore, it is incumbent upon us to find peaceful solutions that respect the Charter of the United Nations and human rights.
In our own neighbourhood, Thailand faces challenges from the situation in Myanmar. As Thailand shares the longest land border with Myanmar, we are directly affected by the spillover effect of the situation in that country. We wish to see a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar, which would also bode well for peace and prosperity in the region at large. We believe that a peaceful political solution in Myanmar must be Myanmar-led and Myanmar-owned. That is why we are engaging with all sides, and we will continue to work closely with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the international community to facilitate dialogue among the parties to drive forward the five-point consensus.
As part of that effort, we are stepping up humanitarian assistance to the people of Myanmar through various channels, including the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management and relevant United Nations organizations. Thailand will continue to support a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar, not just because it is a pragmatic approach but because it is the right way forward.
Sustainable peace, security and development are closely linked and, to secure a sustainable future, we must accelerate the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). On Thailand’s part, we have been sharing our locally driven, people-centred development approach known as the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy (SEP), to advance the implementation of the SDGs. The SEP for SDGs Partnership is known widely as a best practice on SDG localization.
We are concerned with the slow pace of the implementation of the SDGs at the global level, which is only 17 per cent on track. We must ensure that countries have adequate means and resources to achieve the SDGs, especially through financing for development. The fourth International Conference on Financing for Development next year will provide a key opportunity to address the large and growing SDG financing gap. In that regard, Thailand reiterates the call for reform of the international financial architecture.
In addition to ensuring a just and inclusive financing system, we must also strengthen trade, investment and development cooperation, especially through South-South and triangular cooperation. Thailand is committed to forging stronger partnerships, particularly with least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States. Moreover, Thailand’s aspiration to become a member of the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa group and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is driven by our desire to build bridges in promoting North-South development cooperation, which is also critical to addressing urgent challenges, such as climate change.
Indeed, Thailand is among the top 10 countries most affected by climate change. Earlier this month, Thailand and many countries in South-East Asia were faced with destructive floods caused by Typhoon Yagi. We therefore advocate a balanced and equal emphasis on both mitigation and adaptation for climate action. To achieve concrete results, we must scale up climate finance. Thailand looks forward to the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Baku this November, at which Member States will commit to a new collective quantified goal, grounded in the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. At the same time, we hope to see the full operationalization of the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage soon. Climate disasters have taught us that failure to address this matter will delay the achievement of the SDGs and have a widespread impact on human rights and human security. For that reason, the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction is crucial.
The adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was an achievement that met the highest aspirations of the people. Today, amid rising inequalities and vulnerabilities, Thailand believes that the United Nations must remain the bedrock of fundamental truths enshrined in the Declaration — protecting the lives and ensuring the equality and dignity of all. For Thailand, protecting and promoting human rights for all not only means guaranteeing basic human dignity, but is also aimed at providing opportunities to advance social justice and equality. With our long-standing policy to protect all persons and groups, especially the most vulnerable, we have made concrete progress in ensuring equal rights for all those living in Thailand, regardless of their origin, belief, sex or gender.
Based on that commitment, Thailand is presenting our candidature to the Human Rights Council for the term 2025-2027. At the Council, we will serve as a bridge-builder to connect different perspectives and work with all stakeholders. We will ensure that all countries are equipped and supported in their human rights actions through experience-sharing and technical cooperation. Moreover, we will also continue to push for the creation of a safe and secure society for all. Recently, we adopted the Marriage Equality Act. On health care, we will continue to advance the right to health by advocating for universal health coverage and the conclusion of a pandemic treaty, as well as advancing the agenda of the Foreign Ministerial Meeting of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative, for which Thailand serves as Chair this year. On crime prevention, we will work closely with all partners to combat increasing drug trafficking and transnational crime in the region and beyond, especially those enabled by digital technology and underground economies.
Thailand welcomes the successful conclusion of the Summit of the Future. In the next step, we have to work together to make the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) high on impact and high on action by translating it into tangible outcomes. To that end, I have outlined Thailand’s vision to achieve the future through what I call the Four Ps. Whether it be building a future where all are protected, where all can prosper, and which is promising for all, it is essential that we commit our collective political will. That means harnessing our political will to promote the power of technologies to help accelerate the SDGs and taking steps to close the digital divide among countries through the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I). We support technology cross-flows and transfers, capacity-building and digital literacy development to enhance the ability of countries to promote people-centred and planet-centric development. It also means giving importance to the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1, annex II), for our action or inaction today will determine the future. Everywhere, young people and future generations deserve to have big dreams and even bigger doors of opportunities.
Seventy-eight years ago, Thailand looked to the United Nations as a guarantor of a more peaceful and prosperous future. At present, Thailand carries onwards the same belief in a United Nations that is a pioneer of the prevailing peace and drives our peacekeepers and aid workers to serve in remote regions of the globe. In that very same spirit, Thailand pledges to continue to serve as a bridge-builder, fostering dialogue and trust among nations. We may be nations with different and diverse cultures and traditions, but we are united by our common humanity and aspiration for the future we want. To that end, we must together build the United Nations we need.
