At the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate His Excellency Mr. Philémon Yang on his election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. My heartfelt thanks also go to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis in recognition of his fruitful efforts as President of the Assembly at its seventy-eighth session.
Today the world is facing turbulent and complex situations. Controversial geopolitical processes, rapid weaponization, an escalating cold war and armed conflicts, together with the consequences of climate change and other global dangers and threats, will undoubtedly have long-term negative consequences. In that context, it is more critical than ever that we consolidate the joint efforts of the international community to improve security, maintain stability and ensure overall sustainable development. We are clearly capable of bringing about lasting peace and building harmonious lives for humankind and prosperity for our countries, founded primarily on a basis of mutual understanding and constructive cooperation. We should be united in working to achieve those objectives, end all wars and conflicts and reach other peaceful goals.
It is high time to take bold and effective steps forward to strengthen the key role of the United Nations in resolving conflicts and restoring peace and stability throughout the planet. In that regard, I would like to propose the adoption of a special General Assembly draft resolution declaring a decade of the promotion of peace for future generations. As I have said many times, Tajikistan always advocates for settling all conflicts by political and diplomatic means alone. At the same time, I would like to emphasize that Tajikistan continues to unwaveringly support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda For Sustainable Development.
It is worth noting that the 2030 Agenda’s principal message is also reflected in Tajikistan’s National Development Strategy 2030, and our efforts to achieve its primary goals are ongoing. Nevertheless, there is a wide range of difficulties that present obstacles to the timely achievement of sustainable development. Such challenges include insecurity, economic and financial crises, unprecedented global warming caused by climate change, the loss of biodiversity and the outbreak of contagious diseases. In the Political Declaration of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development Convened under the Auspices of the General Assembly, Member States conceded that the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals is under threat. According to the report of the Secretary-General (A/79/79), the international community will be able to achieve only 17 per cent of the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, and we are witnessing setbacks in the results achieved for the SDGs in many developing countries. In view of that, we need to step up our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda in a timely manner and pay particular attention to financing sustainable development. That means we need to prioritize sustainable development and its financing for developing countries. With a view to facilitating and promoting sustainable development achievements, we also believe that the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development, to be held in Spain in July 2025 in line with resolution 78/231, will play a crucial role in exploring new approaches to removing barriers to financing for development.
The activities of the international financial and economic system should meet the needs of developing countries so that it can facilitate Member States’ timely response in countering today’s threats and challenges. In that context, in order to implement the goals and programmes that we have outlined, we believe it is important to continue to provide financing to countries in need through international financial institutions, especially the International Development Association. Digital technologies and artificial intelligence can pave the way effectively towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Tajikistan is taking the constructive and essential measures needed to gradually transition to a digitalized system by adopting a national strategy and relevant conceptual laws. In that regard, I propose that the General Assembly adopt a special draft resolution on the role of artificial intelligence in creating new opportunities for socioeconomic development and accelerating the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in Central Asia.
Tajikistan recognizes the importance of the Summit of the Future, held in the framework of the General Assembly at its current session. The intergovernmental document, the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which was adopted during the Summit, plays a key role in ensuring peace, security and sustainable development, and we welcome the willingness of the international community to implement it. The Pact was adopted at a time when millions of civilians are exposed to security risks and dangers in various regions around the world. We believe that the international community must take joint and effective action to withstand the threat of terrorism, extremism, radicalism, cybercrime, trafficking in narcotics and weapons smuggling and fight other manifestations of transnational crime.
Furthermore, the rise of Islamophobia, as well as the trend of practising double standards in international relationships in recent years, has become a matter of deep concern for Tajikistan. Our country constantly undertakes joint actions in cooperation with the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well as other international partners, to counter security threats and challenges. Consequently, Tajikistan and the State of Kuwait, in cooperation with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, will hold, in the Kuwait City in November, the next high-level conference in the framework of the Dushanbe process on countering terrorism. We believe that this platform will focus mainly on subjects related to maintaining inclusive security and stability and will contribute to the continuation of an extended and hopeful dialogue. We believe that it will also facilitate the exchange of helpful experience and ideas among stakeholders.
Turning to security matters, I would like to emphasize that the Palestinian crisis remains a matter of deep concern to our country. The current tragic situation in that region once again proves that there is absolutely no military solution to the Palestinian case. Tajikistan believes that a definitive and tangible solution to this conflict would be possible only through the implementation of the United Nations resolutions on the recognition of an independent State of Palestine based on the 1967 borders. We hope that the parties to the conflict will take action for a ceasefire deal and arrange peace negotiations and that the international community will take effective steps to restore lasting stability in Palestine.
Moreover, we uphold the establishment of enduring peace and stability, as well as economic and social development in neighbouring Afghanistan. To that end, Tajikistan stands ready to assist in the revival and development of a wide range of sectors of peaceful life in Afghanistan. Accordingly, I reiterate Tajikistan’s call on the international community to spare no effort to help the long-suffering people of Afghanistan, including in regions affected by natural disasters, to prevent a humanitarian crisis in this war-torn country.
It has been more than a year since the United Nations 2023 Water Conference. According to reports from the relevant United Nations agencies, progress in water supply and sanitation, despite some improvements, does not meet our expectations. Much more needs to be done. As a result, Tajikistan, as a champion country, actively cooperates with all stakeholders to implement the commitments stemming from the Water Action Agenda of the United Nations 2023 Water Conference. The successful achievement of those and other water-related commitments and goals will depend on effective multistakeholder partnerships that ensure an integrated, systematic and coherent approach. In that regard, it is important for us to take advantage of the Dushanbe water process platform to monitor the outcomes of the United Nations 2023 Water Conference. We believe that Dushanbe water process will play a pivotal role as a platform for broad, inclusive dialogue among stakeholders for comprehensive preparation for the United Nations Water Conference to be held in Dushanbe in 2028.
Against the backdrop of climate change and its impacts, the international community must work on collective approaches and initiatives, the proper use of natural resources and relevant activities in various fields of human life. In recent years, natural disasters, along with a series of droughts, have caused enormous damage to agriculture, the environment and the economies of developing countries in general. With 93 per cent of our territory covered by mountains, Tajikistan is also vulnerable to climate change, as natural disasters occur frequently, doing annual damage of hundreds of millions of dollars to our national economy. In addition, unfortunately, in many cases, this also results in fatalities.
Climate change is causing the accelerated melting of glaciers and reduced water volume in rivers in various parts of the world, including Central Asia. That process has a negative impact on very real sectors of our national economy, such as energy, industry and agriculture. Today more than 1,000 out of 14,000 Tajik glaciers, which are the main source of drinking water in the region, have completely melted, and the pace of their melting is dramatically increasing. Precipitation and the glaciers of Tajikistan make up to 60 per cent of the water resources in Central Asia.
The General Assembly’s declaration of 2025 as the International Year of Glaciers’ Preservation (resolution 77/158), at the initiative of Tajikistan, provides a suitable basis for developing cooperation among stakeholders. Pursuant to that resolution, 21 March was declared World Day for Glaciers, and an international trust fund to promote glacier preservation was established under the auspices of the Secretary-General. Concurrently, the first high-level international conference on glacier preservation will be hosted in Dushanbe in 2025. I wish to take this opportunity to call on partner countries and organizations to actively participate and contribute in the preparations for and holding of that conference. We believe that that important international conference, which is scheduled to be held in cooperation with UNESCO and the World Meteorological Organization, will play an effective role in assessing the global glacier problem and exploring specific approaches and ways to effectively resolve it. We invite all partners to join us in contributing financially to the international trust fund for glaciers.
It is worth highlighting that, with a view to further advancing the glaciers preservation agenda, Tajikistan, together with France, has put forward another initiative to declare 2025–2034 the Decade of Action for Cryospheric Sciences. Our country has adopted a national strategy for adaptation to climate change for the period leading up to 2030 based on its international obligations, including the specific provisions of the Paris Agreement.
Clearly, one of the ways to successfully mitigate the challenges related to climate change is by developing the green economy, which in turn calls for the development of green energy. Considering the importance of that reality, my country has approved and is currently implementing its Green Economy Development Strategy 2023–2037. We currently produce 98 per cent of our electricity from the country’s hydropower resources, and we are ranked sixth in the world in terms of the share of green energy we produce from renewable sources. The goal, in implementing our relevant plans in the area, is to turn Tajikistan into a green country by 2037.
Today, finding solutions to the daily issues of adapting to climate change and mitigating its negative effects is considered one of the international community’s top priorities. We hope that developed countries, the United Nations and its specialized agencies, influential international financial institutions and other international and regional multilateral entities will further continue to pay serious attention to these important and critical issues. We are convinced that the international community can succeed in achieving its common goals and objectives through the development of trustful dialogue, mutual understanding and constructive and rewarding cooperation.
