First of all, allow me to congratulate the General Assembly on the beginning of its seventy-ninth session.
I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly and wish him every success.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Ambassador Dennis Francis for his effective leadership of the General Assembly during the seventy-eighth session.
Strategic partnership with the United Nations and cooperation with Member States comprise the main approach of Turkmenistan in addressing pressing global issues and challenges. For Turkmenistan, the key condition and major criterion of that work are adherence to the Charter of the United Nations, international legal norms and recognized beneficial models of relations based on equality, sovereignty and mutual respect among all participants in international affairs. In that logic, Turkmenistan supports the global mission of the United Nations as a conductor of the collective mandate and the balancing of the interests of Member States. That position was reaffirmed at the meetings of the Secretary-General with the President of Turkmenistan and national leader of the Turkmen people during his visit to Turkmenistan this summer.
For the seventy-ninth session, Turkmenistan has decided to follow four priorities, which are peace and security, sustainable development, climate change and humanitarian issues. All of those areas are closely interconnected. That means that their implementation must be comprehensive and based on unified principles and approaches. In that context, Turkmenistan advocates for an equal, fair and balanced approach that would ensure that the United Nations pays the same attention to all key areas of the international agenda.
In matters of ensuring peace and security, Turkmenistan’s efforts at the current session will be aimed at strengthening peace and trust, enhancing the role of preventive diplomacy mechanisms and furthering peacebuilding processes in line with the New Agenda for Peace. When it comes to global security, Turkmenistan especially promotes the model of neutrality within the United Nations, which can provide the world community with practical tools to resolve existing and prevent potential conflicts and contradictions.
Next year we will celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of resolution 50/80, on international recognition of the neutral status of Turkmenistan. Over the years, our neutrality has demonstrated its alignment with the high ideals, basic principles and goals of the United Nations. The unanimous adoption in 2015 of the corresponding resolution 69/285 demonstrated that neutrality has become a heritage of the entire world community. At the seventy-ninth session, our country will be promoting further support for the political and legal foundations of neutrality and their application across a broad range of United Nations activities.
Preventive diplomacy holds an important place in that context. We are convinced that the time has come to reflect on the significance of neutrality for global politics and its potential in the current strategic landscape. In that regard, Turkmenistan has put forward an initiative to provide neutral countries with the status of priority partnership with the United Nations in its peacekeeping efforts. We are confident that this will serve as an effective impetus for the international community to more actively utilize the tools of neutrality and preventive diplomacy.
One of the essential aspects of the United Nations security agenda is the practical implementation of resolution 78/266, declaring 2025 the International Year of Peace and Trust. Naturally, as the country that initiated the resolution, Turkmenistan will take the lead role in organizing relevant events next year. At the same time, we rely on the support of all Member States, the Secretariat and its leadership to ensure that the International Year of Peace and Trust becomes a manifestation of the goodwill of the international community, its desire for peace and harmony and for overcoming differences and conflicts, and its rejection of dividing lines.
In the regional dimension, the most important aspect of ensuring security is cooperation on the Afghan issue and support for the people of Afghanistan in their aspirations to begin peaceful, constructive work to rebuild the economy and social sphere and solve humanitarian problems. In that context, I would like to highlight the major infrastructure projects in Afghanistan being implemented by our country, together with international partners. Among them is the construction of the strategic Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline. Just two weeks ago, we began a new stage of construction of the pipeline on Afghan territory. Other significant projects include the construction of power transmission and fibre-optic communication lines along the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan route, as well as a new railway from Turkmenistan in the direction of Afghanistan. Turkmenistan’s humanitarian aid to the Afghan people will continue, including the free construction of social facilities there and the education of Afghan students in our country’s educational institutions. In that way, Turkmenistan in practice confirms its strong position of solidarity with the people of Afghanistan.
In addressing the global climate agenda, Turkmenistan will be focusing on the protection of the environment in Central Asia and the Caspian Sea region. In that regard, our country advocates for more active and extensive United Nations involvement in saving the Aral Sea. Turkmenistan initiated the adoption of two recent General Assembly resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea. Furthermore, in 2023 the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific adopted a resolution on the modalities for creating a United Nations special programme for the Aral Sea basin.
Among other problems specific to Central Asia that have much broader consequences and impact, we highlight desertification and the reduction of water resources. All of that requires more active cooperation with the United Nations and the presence of its resident offices in the region on a permanent basis. Turkmenistan is ready to work to that end. As a concrete step, in cooperation with the United Nations, our country is promoting the establishment of a specialized regional centre for climate-related technologies.
Another topic that extends far beyond regional borders is the Caspian issue. In that regard, we especially emphasize that preserving the Caspian Sea as unique natural complex is not just the internal affair of the littoral States but a problem and challenge at the global scale. The approaches to resolving them should be appropriate. Therefore, Turkmenistan appeals to the United Nations and its relevant agencies, including the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme, financial institutions, environmental funds — primarily the Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund — and other structures, urging them to move towards systematic and targeted cooperation with the Caspian States to combat the sea’s shallowing, the destruction of its ecological balance, the reduction of biodiversity, and other ecological and climate issues affecting the Caspian Sea. The President of Turkmenistan, at the previous session of the General Assembly, proposed the Caspian ecology initiative (see A/78/PV.4). We are ready to start an active dialogue on that topic and hope for the full support of the General Assembly.
In matters of sustainable development, we propose moving forward with a number of specific initiatives from Turkmenistan. In particular, we are talking about developing a global framework programme for the transition to a circular economy. Other initiatives include the creation of a global atlas of sustainable transport connectivity and an alliance for global energy security and sustainable development. In cooperation with the United Nations, we are ready to begin developing algorithms for joint work on those proposals.
Turkmenistan will continue to work with the United Nations to overcome the consequences of humanitarian crises, address population issues, protect motherhood and children and safeguard the rights of persons with disabilities, refugees and stateless persons, among other topics. I would like to note that our country has done significant work in reducing and preventing statelessness. Currently, more than 32,000 people, including refugees and stateless persons, have been granted Turkmen citizenship. With that achievement, this year we have fulfilled our five-year national action plan to eliminate statelessness.
Next year, the entire world will celebrate the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations. We are approaching a milestone where responsibility, foresight and realism must guide all our thoughts and actions. It is time to reflect on the path travelled, assess the experience, correct mistakes and shortcomings and together move forward in improving the work of our Organization and its institutions.
The one thing that must remain unshakeable is our commitment to the values, principles and goals of the United Nations, because they have proven their viability and alignment with the fundamental long-term interests of humankind. On the basis of that fact, it is now more necessary than ever to combine all responsible forces. Turkmenistan believes in the United Nations and its huge creative potential. For our country, the United Nations has always been and remains the unique international organization with universal legal status. The voice of the United Nations must remain strong in ensuring global peace and security and sustainable development and solving humanitarian problems. Turkmenistan will continue to contribute its efforts in addressing the global challenges for the future of the world through the realization of its priorities.
