I bring warmest Pacific greetings from the Kingdom of Tonga and our blue Pacific continent.
First, I wish to congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session.
I also thank his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for his able leadership during a period where global challenges continued to increase in numbers and complexity.
I acknowledge Secretary-General António Guterres for his steadfast stewardship of our home, the United Nations, during these troubled times.
We convene at this seventy-ninth session under the theme “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. My delegation pledges our unwavering support for that noble goal. At a time of escalating conflicts and near-conflict situations on the horizon, all too often triggered by political instability, economic disparities, social tensions and the security threats posed by climate change, we must rally around that goal. If we fail to do so, we will further erode world peace and fail peoples’ lives far and wide. The long-awaited reform of the Security Council is now urgent and crucial and must happen swiftly. It is our responsibility to resolve adequately the security challenges of the twenty-first century. We must include non-traditional security issues like climate change on its agenda. Further, we must include the voice of small island developing States (SIDS).
In our quest to leave no one behind, we must take a hard look at the lagging progress in achieving sustainable development by 2030. That goal is equally imperilled unless we change our approach. Human dignity is intrinsically built on peace, security and sustainability. If we cannot act now, decisively and collectively, the goal to leave no one behind will be just words and we will have further eroded peoples’ trust and hopes. The key is not words; the key is our shared commitment to action.
I commend the tireless efforts that led to the ambitious and balanced text of the Summit of the Future. Not only do we stand at a critical juncture in our collective history, but the time is now to safeguard the needs and interests of present and future generations. The spirit of compromise and commitment demonstrated by delegations and regional groups gives us hope that multilateralism can work. As our forebearers, our founders, did, we pledge to spare succeeding generations from the scourge of war and we commit to building a world where there is hope and they can thrive.
Our commitment must be to sustainable development, to the preservation of our planet’s resources and to the pursuit of a future that is inclusive, equitable, secure and sustainable. We must commit to the highest values of human dignity and justice. We therefore welcome the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1). We are resolute in our commitment to working collaboratively with Member States to advance peace, sustainable development and human dignity. We hope for action that will leave no one behind.
Last month, Tonga assumed the chairmanship of the fifty-third Pacific Islands Forum Leaders Meeting. We were honoured to welcome Secretary-General Guterres as a special guest. I reiterate our Forum leaders’ and Pacific people’s deep gratitude for his in-person participation. We now look forward to continued and augmented support and tailored solutions from the United Nations in our efforts for our peoples’ lives and futures.
The theme of our meeting was “A resilient Pacific: Build better now”. The urgency of our theme certainly was underscored by the torrential rains, flash-flooding and 6.5 magnitude earthquake that struck Nuku’alofa on the first day of the meeting. That was yet another stark reminder of our vulnerability to natural disasters. Once again, it also demonstrated our unwavering resilience and the priority we place on the full implementation of our Early Warnings For All initiative by 2027 and for disaster preparedness.
The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024 before us is grim. The report reveals what we see every day on the ground — a stark divergence from the ambitious targets set forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Climate change, escalating inequalities and persistent conflicts are compounding challenges, leaving many countries struggling to meet even the most fundamental goals. Without urgent and coordinated global action, the vision of a more equitable and sustainable world may remain just another elusive dream. That means eroded trust in our ability to keep promises; it will jeopardize both our planet and its inhabitants. We must and we can confront those seemingly insurmountable challenges with innovation and determination. We can no longer afford business as usual.
Decade after decade, year after year, we present to this body the existential threat that climate change poses to the Pacific, including Tonga. Our situation has become even more urgent this year. Climate change is the single greatest threat to the survival and prosperity of the blue Pacific continent. Once again, we urge the international community to promptly and dramatically act to restrict global warming to 1.5°C. Industrialized nations must strengthen their emissions reduction commitments. We must ensure that climate finance is speedily and easily accessible to Pacific island nations. Let there be no doubt — we are teetering on the brink of a climate catastrophe.
While in Tonga, the Secretary-General issued a global SOS — Save our Seas — warning of rising sea levels. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) echoed that urgent message, launching the State of the Climate in the South-West Pacific 2023 report. The report confirms that 2023 was the warmest year on record. The scientific consensus is irrefutable — our climate is changing at an unprecedented rate, with devastating consequences. Extreme weather events are becoming more frequent and intense. Cyclones and typhoons are wreaking havoc on our communities, leaving behind trails of destruction that take years to repair. The economic toll is immense, but the human cost is far greater: lives lost, communities shattered, hopes lost and futures uncertain.
The most alarming aspect of the crisis is the unprecedented rise in sea levels. The WMO report confirms that sea level rise in the South-West Pacific is significantly exceeding the global average. In some parts of the Pacific, sea levels have risen by 10 to 15 centimetres in the past 30 years — more than double the global average. Without bold and coordinated global action to expedite assistance to the Pacific and its most vulnerable inhabitants, Tonga and other Pacific countries can expect sea levels to rise twofold by mid-century. That will exacerbate the frequency and severity of storm surges and coastal flooding.
For the nations of the Pacific, those changes are not merely environmental issues; they are existential threats that jeopardize the very existence of small Pacific island countries, including Tonga. Rising sea levels are eroding coastlines, swallowing entire islands and forcing families to abandon their ancestral homes. This is not just about losing land; it is about our very identities, losing heritage and culture. We have issued a strong call for including sea level rise as a stand-alone and permanent item on the General Assembly’s agenda. The upcoming twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change presents a critical opportunity to operationalize the Loss and Damage Fund, transforming pledges into tangible support for vulnerable nations.
Our ocean, seabed and land are simply who we are. As I mentioned earlier, the severe and irreversible threats posed by climate change-related sea level rise will disproportionately impact the lives, livelihoods, food security, ecosystems and well-being of our people. We have established key declarations, including the 2023 Declaration on the Continuity of Statehood and the Protection of Persons in the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise and the Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise. We have also developed and endorsed the Pacific Regional Framework on Climate Mobility and introduced the Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific. The latter is the world’s first regional framework linking climate change and disaster risk. Now we need to act on it.
We commend the United Nations for addressing that critical issue and welcome the high-level plenary meeting on addressing the existential threats posed by sea level rise. The 2023 Pacific Islands Forum Declaration on the Continuity of Statehood takes a clear stance on protecting Pacific peoples’ rights and sovereignty. By asserting the continued existence of Pacific Island Forum members’ statehood, sovereignty and rights and duties, the Declaration underscores our determination to safeguard both the territorial and human dimensions of our States under international law. The Declaration commits to protecting persons affected by climate change, ensuring that human rights, political status, cultural heritage, identity and dignity are upheld. We call for global cooperation to achieve the Declaration’s objectives, in line with international principles of fairness, equity and shared responsibility.
Yes, the challenges we face are immense, but they are not insurmountable. The resilience of the Pacific peoples is legendary. Through centuries, our communities have weathered countless storms, adapted to changing conditions and preserved our rich cultures through adversity. Now more than ever, we must draw upon that resilience. It is now that our Forum islands countries urgently require timely, predictable and scaled-up access to climate financing to protect our communities.
Tonga is proud to announce the establishment of the Pacific Resilience Facility (PRF), a Pacific-led, member-owned and managed climate and disaster resilience financing facility. Tonga will host the PRF office and we acknowledge the commitments and contributions received from our development partners and friends of the Pacific thus far. We call upon global partners to support our Pacific-led solution, the PRF. The key goal is to bridge the financing gap for smaller, high-impact adaptation projects. I would like to once again thank the Secretary-General for his leadership and commitment in supporting the Pacific Islands Forum by convening a global pledging event for the PRF in 2025. We again urge multilateral climate funds, such as the Green Climate Fund and the Adaptation Fund, to establish dedicated climate finance access windows, tailored to the conditions and needs of vulnerable countries like the Pacific small island developing States.
We appreciate the support for the new 10-year blueprint recognizing the special case of small island developing States, the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS (ABAS). The Agenda goes beyond being a mere policy framework; it is our collective vision for sustainable growth and resilience in the face of unprecedented challenges. We support the allocation of resources and tailored systems to facilitate the implementation of the concrete actions outlined in the 10 thematic areas of ABAS.
At the same time, reforming the international financial architecture will be crucial to supporting that new programme of action. That includes three substantive global policy agendas: redefining eligibility for development resources, improving access to climate finance and creating long-term debt sustainability. Implementing the ABAS is a vital step toward accelerating the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. We request the support of key entities within the United Nations system to help implement the ABAS.
Recognizing our unique vulnerabilities, my fellow Pacific Islands Forum leaders welcomed the adoption of the multidimensional vulnerability index (MVI). That practical instrument, advocated over many years by SIDS, offers a more comprehensive understanding of vulnerability, providing renewed hope and impetus to the 2030 Agenda through a more context-responsive approach. We look forward to the operationalization of the MVI in relevant United Nations settings and urge international organizations and financial institutions to consider MVI ratings in their eligibility criteria for grant and concessional financing.
The opinion may be that our Pacific communities are remote and small. Let there be no doubt that our economies continue to suffer, like so many, from the effects of geopolitical tensions and supply chain disruptions. Our people suffer from rising inflation and are experiencing increased hardship and deepening poverty, particularly for the most vulnerable in our blue Pacific region. However, at such critical times, the Pacific Islands Forum is steadfast in its commitment to building a resilient Pacific region of hope and prosperity that ensures that all Pacific peoples can lead productive lives. We invite all partners to support our development aspirations, outlined in our 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent and our forthcoming Pacific Roadmap for Economic Development.
Resilient transformation requires Pacific peoples to have access to quality, affordable, accessible and inclusive health and education services. Our blue Pacific region will focus on improving climate-resilient health care, education infrastructures and digital platforms to mitigate risks, manage climate-sensitive diseases and non-communicable diseases (NCDs) effectively, and ensure continuity and equity in learning across our blue Pacific continent. We remain resolute in our commitment to the global fight against NCDs. We reaffirm our commitment to building stronger partnerships among government sectors and other relevant sectors to address the root causes of NCDs through a holistic whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach.
Addressing the global plastic pollution problem, especially in the marine environment, is a priority. It is a threat to our ecosystems and health. The Pacific Ocean is our Pacific identity. It is a vital resource for food and livelihoods. A healthy ocean will aid in our fight against climate change.
The actions of the Government of Tonga focus on three key thematic areas: national resilience, quality services and affordability, and progressive economic growth. Our goal is to enhance national resilience by creating stronger platforms to tackle natural disasters and address the persistent issues brought about by climate change. We aspire to alleviate relative poverty and improve the quality of social protection measures. We will also mobilize national and international responses to reduce the supply and use of illicit drugs and address harm reduction processes.
We aim to enhance education for everyone, prioritizing safer schools, tackling dropout rates, advocating for gender equality and expanding vocational training opportunities, all while ensuring quality services and affordability. Our efforts are also directed towards improving access to health care that is both affordable and of high quality, with a particular emphasis on addressing the coronavirus disease, NCDs and preventive measures. Our focus is on developing Government services that are of exceptional quality and can be easily accessed by all. That entails enhancing access to high-speed broadband technology and ensuring that energy, communication, drinking water and a clean environment are more affordable. Our main objectives for fostering progressive economic growth include giving priority to trade and private sector development, enhancing the quality and accessibility of public infrastructure and forging stronger partnerships to drive development.
As I conclude, allow me to close the circle and come back to the critical element of this session’s theme of leaving no one behind. That aspiration must be our guide for eradicating poverty, ending discrimination and upholding the fundamental rights of individuals, reducing inequalities and vulnerabilities that not only undermine our shared humanity but also leave too many without hope.
The advancement of one community or nation cannot occur in isolation from the well-being of others. By embracing a fair and equitable playing field, we foster a more resilient and harmonious global society, advancing peace, sustainable development and human dignity. We must travel the path to enduring peace and sustainable development with a sense of urgency, just as others have done before us. In that, let us be guided by shared values of justice and human dignity. Our collective endeavour to leave no one behind must ensure that every person’s potential is recognized her or his rights upheld, and so we must bridge gaps, dismantle barriers and amplify voices that have historically been marginalized. That is what we owe present and future generations.
