At the outset, I am pleased to extend to you, Sir, and through you to the Republic of Cameroon my warmest congratulations on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I wish you success in managing its work and affirm Tunisia’s support for your vision of “Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for everyone, everywhere”.
I also offer Mr. Dennis Francis, President of the Assembly its seventy-eighth session, my sincere thanks and appreciation for his successful presidency.
I reiterate my appreciation for the ongoing efforts of Secretary-General António Guterres to restore confidence and respect for multilateral action.
As hopeful as we are of achieving the necessary transformations and reforms and establishing a more peaceful, secure, just and sustainable world through the initiatives and paths proposed within the framework of the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and the outcomes of the Summit of the Future, we express our deep concern and condemn the current situation in the Middle East and the terrible humanitarian tragedy of the Palestinian people, who, for nearly a year now, have been subjected on their own land to the most heinous war crimes, genocide and all forms of violations of human rights and the purposes and principles for which the United Nations was founded. The occupying forces perpetrate their crimes with impunity in the face of abhorrent international silence and unjustified and immoral paralysis.
The failure of the international community to enforce respect for international humanitarian law, despite the measures approved by the International Court of Justice to protect Palestinians in the Gaza Strip from the risk of genocide, puts the lives of Palestinians in the balance. Suddenly, the slogan repeated from various rostrums, calling for human rights and humanitarian issues to take precedence, falls silent when it comes to the Palestinian people.
The only way to a secure future for all peoples begins with the belief that all human lives are equal, without discrimination or selectivity and free of double standards. We cannot launch a new phase of multilateral action, international relations and sustainable development, based on the principle of leaving no one behind, while the tragedy of the Palestinian people continues to be ignored. In that context, we call on the international community to take immediate, effective and responsible steps to save what can still be saved, stop the bloodshed and end the war of extermination and starvation in Gaza — a war in which schools, hospitals, facilities and civilian infrastructure have been targeted and more than 40,000 people have been killed. We also call on the Security Council to awaken from its state of stagnation and impotence and to assume its natural role in maintaining international peace and security by holding the occupation authorities responsible for the humanitarian tragedy in Gaza, imposing an immediate ceasefire, halting the blatant and heinous aggression against the defenceless Palestinian people, and preventing all plans for forced displacement, settlement and the violation of holy places.
The war on Gaza has created a deep rift in the conscience of humankind and undermined peoples’ trust in the ability of the international community and its main bodies to enforce its decisions. We recall the opinion issued by the International Court of Justice on 19 July, at the request of the General Assembly, on the legal consequences of the policies and practices of the Zionist occupation in the occupied Palestinian territories, which recognized the illegality of the continued presence of the occupying Power in the Palestinian territories and that the State of Israel is obligated to halt new settlement activities and immediately evacuate all settlers from the occupied Palestinian territories. Our country believes that the Court’s opinion puts the international community to the test of its commitment to enshrining the principle of the supremacy of international law and applying its rules to everyone, without exception or selectivity.
Our country remains committed to its steadfast and unconditional support for the right of the Palestinian people to recover their imprescriptible, legitimate and inalienable rights, foremost among which is their right to self-determination and the establishment of their independent and sovereign State on all of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital. Tunisia affirms its support for Palestine’s request to obtain full membership of the United Nations. We appreciate the wave of international recognition of the State of Palestine and hope that it will lead to Palestine obtaining full membership without further delay. Tunisia also reiterates its strong condemnation of the aggression against brotherly Lebanon, targeting its people and threatening its security and stability, at a time when our countries are meeting under the banner of the United Nations. Tunisia calls on the Security Council to take a firm and decisive position against those crimes against humanity without delay.
The principle of leaving no one behind cannot be achieved with slogans, nor can we achieve the declared goals or overcome past and present failures unless we all have a sincere desire to change and reform. That will require agreement on a unified and responsible diagnosis of the root causes of the failure of the current international system to confront the intensification of conflicts and wars, the rise of extremism, terrorism and organized crime, and the deterioration of climate crises and disasters that threaten the survival of millions of people. Those ills are compounded by the unprecedented spread of poverty, hunger and inequality, a significant increase in the number of refugees and displaced persons, the widening development and digital gap between the North and the South, and the inability of the international financial system to respond to the development needs of the vast majority of countries.
All those challenges are serious indicators that the existing international system has gone off track, requiring all of us to carry out the necessary reviews and reforms to correct the state of disorder, chaos and inequality. Those challenges also require all of us — States, institutions and peoples — to engage in a participatory approach based on shared responsibilities, respect for international law and adherence to the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and human rights on an equal footing, without discrimination or politicization.
The events witnessed by the world over the past eight decades have demonstrated the urgent need to reform the system of international relations and review the foundations and working methods of multilateral action to meet the needs of peoples and put an end to all the imbalances that have prevailed and continue to prevail, unleashing calamities, tragedies and suffering on millions of people and placing the world today at undeniable existential risk, which we cannot continue to address by using the same tools and methods that only take the interests of a minority of States into account at the expense of the majority. In that regard, we stress the urgent need for the countries of the North to respect their commitments to financing development, supporting efforts to combat climate change and effectively participating in reducing poverty, supporting growth and building resilience and sustainability in developing countries.
We also stress the need to put an end to all forms of trusteeship, the imposition of policies and dictates and interference in the internal affairs of States, and to respect their national sovereignty, the independence of their decisions, the choices of their peoples and their cultural and civilizational specificities, which represent a factor for enrichment and diversity. The challenges ahead can be met only by rebuilding international relations on the basis of solidarity, constructive cooperation, justice, mutual respect and equality. We also call for strengthening the role of the United Nations and introducing the necessary reforms to its institutions and bodies in order to make its performance more effective and enhance its credibility, especially that of the Security Council, which has become paralysed as a result of the escalating geostrategic conflicts.
Tunisia, based on its sincere belief in multilateral action and in keeping with the purposes of the United Nations Charter, has engaged in all the tracks and initiatives proposed by the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda, the Sustainable Development Goal Summit and the Summit of the Future, held recently here at the United Nations. If appropriate follow-up and implementation mechanisms are put in place, their outcomes can represent a historic opportunity and a fundamental tool for addressing challenges, mitigating risks and establishing a more secure, peaceful and sustainable world.
At the same time, Tunisia reaffirms the urgent need to introduce fundamental reforms to the global financial system, review the role of international rating agencies, reduce the burden of debt and debt service on developing countries, and facilitate their access to sources of development financing. That will allow them to recover from the repercussions of successive global crises, for which they have paid a heavy price, despite not having caused most of them, and to direct their capacities to meet the essential human and social development needs of their peoples.
We also call for developing international cooperation tools at the bilateral and multilateral levels to ensure the recovery of stolen funds moved abroad. That will accelerate the pace of economic recovery and promote development, given that it is the fundamental right of affected peoples, and help to prevent the recurrence of such violations, which deplete State resources and represent one of the greatest manifestations of corruption.
The phenomenon of irregular migration is growing in many regions of the world, especially in our Mediterranean basin, and is one of the main indicators of weak global governance and the absence of political will to address the repercussions of development crises, climate change and conflicts. As we have emphasized time and again, that multidimensional issue requires the adoption of a joint approach that is based on shared responsibilities and brings together all parties from countries of origin, transit and destination, along with international and regional organizations, to address the deep causes of the growth of that phenomenon and not just its consequences.
We have also called for comprehensive solutions that are based on addressing vulnerabilities, the decline in literacy rates and weak development programmes. Such solutions would usher in a new reality in countries of origin, especially in the African continent, and provide their children with a dignified life and decent work opportunities that preserve their right to life and development, protect them from the perils of journeys in search of a better life on the northern shore of the Mediterranean, and shield them from the exploitation of criminal smuggling and human trafficking networks.
Our approach to dealing with irregular migration flows is clear and based on respect for human rights and rejection of all forms of racial discrimination and hate speech, within the framework of our international obligations and national legislation. We continue, to the extent of our ability, to strive to save lives and provide the necessary care and support to those who deserve it while safeguarding their dignity, but we refuse to accept projects for the hidden settlement of irregular migrants. We also reject all political and media exploitation of the situation and suffering of migrants to achieve political goals and serve suspicious agendas.
We in Tunisia are aware of the challenges of the coming phase and have continued steadfastly on the path of reform and strengthening the pillars of democracy, the rule of law and good governance, which are based on combating and preventing corruption and achieving the aspirations of our people to greater prosperity, well-being and sustainable development. We adhere to the pillars of our foreign policy and our international commitments and rely on our own human capacities and energies and on constructive cooperation and partnership relations with our friends and partners on the basis of shared benefit, equality and mutual respect. Our young people are a source of inspiration and the face of the future; we therefore ensure that they play their pioneering role in transformative solutions and decision-making. We also continue to strengthen legislative frameworks and strategic plans for the economic integration and empowerment of women and to expand their participation in public affairs and in all fields, including global peacekeeping.
With the same resolve and commitment, Tunisia continues to play an active role in all international and United Nations efforts to promote regional and international security and peace, ensure respect for international law and international humanitarian law, end all forms of injustice, occupation and human rights violations, and achieve development for all.
In our immediate neighbourhood, we affirm Tunisia’s firm position in support of the efforts of our Libyan brothers and sisters to overcome differences and achieve a political settlement through constructive dialogue, with the assistance of the United Nations, in a way that preserves the security and stability of sisterly Libya and strengthens its national unity. We also reiterate Tunisia’s rejection of all forms of foreign interference in the internal affairs of sisterly Libya.
In the same context, we call for concerted United Nations and international efforts to identify political solutions to the situations in Syria and Yemen that will end the suffering of their brotherly peoples, restore security and peace and preserve their sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. Tunisia also calls on the Sudanese parties to stop fighting and resort to dialogue and peaceful means to overcome the crisis, restore security and stability to the Sudan and put an end to the suffering of its people from the scourges of war and displacement.
As for the African continent, which is the most affected by climate change and the repercussions of global crises, terrorism and instability, we call for more concerted international and United Nations efforts to help Africa overcome its challenges and crises and move to restore stability, security, peace and sustainable development. My country believes in the need to find African solutions to African challenges as a method to achieve our goal of silencing the guns by 2030. We also reiterate our call for the United Nations financial and logistical support for peace operations led by the African Union and stress the need to pursue cooperation and coordination among international and regional structures to achieve the Africa we want.
The world has entered a new phase of digital transformation and the increasing use of modern technologies in all fields. In emphasizing the importance of the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I), we call for strengthened cooperation in the areas of technology transfer and for bridging the digital gap that still separates the North and the South so that no one is left behind. In that context, we highlight the need to confront manifestations of digital chaos, misinformation and the criminal and illegal use of digital technologies to sow the seeds of turmoil, destabilize communities and undermine their resources.
The coming phase will be complicated by the challenges and risks facing the security and well-being of present and future generations and the future of our planet. We can no longer address the situation of our world with the same old tools and methods, nor can we reproduce the mistakes and imbalances of the past. The only way forward is one based on the values of solidarity, multilateral cooperation and a sense of shared destiny.
Tunisian foreign policy and its diplomatic tools have always been characterized by optimism and pragmatism. Despite all the challenges and shocks facing the world, Tunisia believes that the United Nations remains our only refuge as the home of international legitimacy and the bearer of the hopes of the peoples of the world as we prepare to celebrate the eightieth anniversary of its founding next year.
