On behalf of my country and my nation, I would like to express my most heartfelt greetings and respect. I am honoured to have the opportunity today to address the General Assembly once again. I hope that its seventy-ninth session will be a blessing for our countries and all humankind. I want to congratulate Mr. Francis on completing his term as President of the Assembly and to wish his successor, Mr. Yang, every success.
I would also like to express my pleasure at seeing the delegation of Palestine in its rightful place among the Member States. I hope that this historic step, the result of a long struggle, will be a final turning point on Palestine’s road to full membership in the United Nations. The international community, and all of us in the human family, must fulfil our obligations to the Palestinian people without delay.
I know that everyone here is monitoring on television the various ongoing crises that we are trying to manage. Today I am representing not a country located far from those tensions but rather one that is situated at the very heart of the tensions and war. And while some may criticize us, today we will speak the truth frankly and openly at this forum for the human race. The United Nations, under whose roof we are speaking today, was established in the aftermath of the Second World War — in which millions of people lost their lives — with a view to maintaining international peace and security. With its establishment, expectations for global stability, peace and justice were reborn, and hopes for peace blossomed once again.
Unfortunately, to put it bluntly, in the past few years the United Nations has failed to fulfil its founding mission and has gradually become a dysfunctional structure. “The world is bigger than five nations” is my credo, and it represents our common values, which we now need more than ever. International justice cannot be left to the will of five privileged members of the Security Council. The most dramatic example of that is the massacre that has been going on in Gaza for the past 350 days. Since 7 October 2023, 41,000 Palestinians have been killed in Israel’s ongoing attacks. Some 41,000 lives, mostly of children and women, have been ruthlessly taken away. There are more than 10,000 others — most of them children — whose whereabouts no one knows. And a further 100,000 people have been injured or maimed or have lost limbs. In addition, 172 journalists have been killed while trying to do their job in very difficult conditions, along with more than 500 medics who were trying to save lives. Humanitarian aid workers, including 215 United Nations personnel — who came to the rescue of the people of Gaza who were struggling with hunger and thirst — have also been killed.
The attackers have hit marketplaces, tents and camps where refugees were sheltering. They have also hit 820 mosques and three churches, which should not be touched even in time of war. They have deliberately hit dozens of hospitals, hundreds of schools and more than 130 ambulances carrying patients. Within this very forum, they have shredded the Charter of the United Nations and shamelessly challenged the conscience of the whole world.
The leaked images from Israel’s prisons — which it has turned into concentration camps — clearly show what kind of barbarity we are facing. As a result of Israel’s attacks, Gaza has become the world’s largest cemetery for women and children. More than 17,000 children have been targeted by Israeli bullets and bombs. Hind Rajab was only five years old when she was killed. She and her family were seeking safety when their car was hit by Israeli forces. She lost everything: her mother, her father, her siblings, her cousins — and every hope she had packed away. She was the only one to survive. She waited desperately for rescue for 12 days. Her plaintive cry was, “Will you come to take me away from here? I am afraid”, as she waited for a helping hand to reach out to her.
Despite the sophistication of our world, the technology at our disposal, the institutions and organizations with enormous budgets we have established that employ tens of thousands of people, we, as a human family of 8 billion souls, still cannot manage to rescue a six-year-old girl, who, like an injured sparrow trapped underneath the rubble, was shaking before our very eyes. Hundreds of Gazan children have died and continue to die in Gaza because they cannot find a morsel of bread, a sip of water or a bowl of soup.
Not only are children in Gaza dying, but also the United Nations system, as are the values that the West claims to defend. The truth is dying, and the hopes of humankind to live in a more just world are dying one by one.
Before the General Assembly in this Hall today, I bluntly, openly and frankly call upon human rights organizations to tell me if the people in Gaza and the West Bank are not human beings. Do children in Palestine have no rights? Can they safely play in the streets of their homelands? I call upon the international press organizations to ask if the journalists murdered by Israel on live television — whose offices were previously ransacked — are not their colleagues. I call upon the Security Council to ask what it is waiting for before it acts to prevent the genocide in Gaza and put a stop to this cruel barbarianism. What is the Council waiting for to stop Netanyahu and his network, which is endangering the lives of the Palestinian people as part of a mass-murder network? Why is the Council waiting to stop him from endangering his own people and the entire region for political gain?
I would also like to call out the countries unconditionally supporting Israel. How long will they be able to live with the shame of witnessing this massacre?
While children are dying in Gaza, Ramallah and Lebanon and babies are dying in incubators, the international community is unfortunately being given a difficult test, and it has failed spectacularly. What is happening in Palestine is the sign of a great moral collapse. I believe that the peoples of the world and the leaders of countries and international organizations should reflect on this painful landscape.
I would like to state clearly and forcefully in this Hall that the Israeli Government has disregarded basic human rights, trampled on international law at every opportunity and is practicing ethnic cleansing. Step by step, it is committing a clear genocide against a nation and a people and occupying their lands. Palestinians, whose freedom, independence and most fundamental rights have been violated, are justified in exercising their legitimate right to resist this occupation and ethnic cleansing. The just resistance of the Palestinian people against the occupiers of their land is too noble, honourable and justifiable to be called illegitimate. It is heroic and noble.
The only reason Israel can commit its aggressions against the Palestinian people is the unconditional support of a group of countries. I would therefore like to salute my brothers and sisters who have supported the legitimate resistance in Palestine. Once again, the support by a group of countries for Israel is the reason why this aggression remains ongoing. Countries that have a say in Israel’s actions are openly complicit in this massacre with their policy of “run for the hare and catch the hound”. Those who are supposedly working for a ceasefire on the public stage continue to send arms and ammunition to Israel so that it can continue its massacres behind the scenes. This inconsistency is the essence of insincerity.
Since May, there has been a proposal circulated, going back and forth, in which Hamas has repeatedly declared its acceptance of the ceasefire offer. However, by constantly dragging its feet, the Israeli Government has made it clear that it is the party that does not want peace, which has made settling the dispute much more difficult, almost impossible. By constantly finding excuses, by its deception and stalling, by surreptitiously killing its negotiating partner at the very moment the parties were closest to a ceasefire, Israel has forfeited any credit it had. In an environment where Security Council resolution 2735 (2024), remains unimplemented, coercive measures against Israel should now be considered.
Israel’s behaviour has once again demonstrated that it is imperative for the international community to develop a protection mechanism for Palestinian civilians. Just as Hitler was stopped by a human alliance 70 years ago, so must Netanyahu and his murderous network be stopped by a human alliance today.
We believe that the General Assembly’s authority to recommend the use of armed force, as set forth in resolution 377(V) of 1950, known as the Uniting for peace resolution, should be invoked at this time. An immediate and permanent ceasefire must be established, hostages and prisoners must be exchanged, and unhindered and uninterrupted humanitarian aid must be delivered to Gaza. It is vitally important that a helping hand be extended to the people of Gaza, especially before winter, when conditions on the ground will become even more challenging.
At present, 70 per cent of the water supplies and 75 per cent of the bakeries in Gaza have been destroyed. Some 95 per cent of health-care centres have been partially or completely damaged. Further, approximately 150,000 houses have been completely destroyed, while 200,000 houses have been partially destroyed, 80,000 of which are today uninhabitable. Infectious diseases such as polio and hepatitis are on the rise.
Because of limited access, people in Gaza have received only a quarter of the aid they urgently need. My country, Türkiye, has been providing humanitarian aid to our brothers and sisters in Palestine, and we will continue to do so. Having delivered more than 60,000 tons of aid, Türkiye has sent the largest amount of aid to Gaza of any country in the world. Likewise, by halting commercial transactions with Israel, we have made our stance on this issue crystal clear.
During the last couple of weeks, Israel has increased its attacks in Lebanon, and we stand with the people and the Government of that country. We can see this truth for what it is: the murders of 41,000 people will not rest until those who gave the orders, pulled the triggers and dropped the bombs have been held to account for their crimes. We will not heave a sigh of relief nor will our conscience go silent until that is done. Compensation for the billions of dollars of damage caused in the destroyed cities of Lebanon, which have in fact been reduced to rubble, must and will be paid by the perpetrators.
We support the case brought by the Republic of South Africa at the International Court of Justice to ensure that Israel’s crimes do not go unpunished. We will take all steps necessary for justice to be for Ayşenur Ezgi Eygi, and we have applied to the Court to be an intervenor in the case. We will fight for the blood of Ms. Eygi, who was murdered with a shot in the head by Israeli soldiers at a peaceful protest in Nablus. Indeed, we will unstintingly fight for the pursuit of all legal remedies for crimes that have been perpetrated.
While a ceasefire in Gaza is urgently needed, the issue underlying the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territories. A Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, independent, sovereign and geographically integrated, with East Jerusalem as its capital, must be brought into being without any further delay.
Let it be known that we are closely following Israel’s increasing attacks against our first Qibla, Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Let me state from this podium that I, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, am speaking merely politically when I say that. I am inspired by our ancestors, who always stood on the side of the victims, with honour and nobility.
Throughout history, Türkiye as a nation has always been on the side of the oppressed against oppressors and oppression. We remain such a nation. Five centuries ago, we welcomed Jews fleeing the Inquisition, and nearly a hundred years ago, we welcomed Jews fleeing Hitler’s concentration camps. We opened our arms wide.
Let me clearly state that, as a country and a nation, we have no animosity or hostility towards the people of Israel. We oppose anti-Semitism in the same way we oppose the targeting of Muslims just because of their faith. Our problem is with the Israeli Government’s policies that authorize massacres. Just as it was five centuries ago, our problem is with the oppressor and the oppression.
Everyone should know about this: we will always speak the truth and support what is right and what is fair. Even if it makes some people uncomfortable, we will continue to shout out the truth and stand with the righteous, boldly saying what we know to be correct.
Finally, I would like to thank all the courageous people who have shown solidarity with the Palestinian people without discriminating on the basis of faith, country, language or religion and who take to the streets almost every week to raise their voices against the massacres in Gaza. I would like to thank in particular university students and youth.
Unfortunately, in the fourteenth year of the conflict in Syria, that country is still far from stable. The economic and humanitarian situation in Syria, which is in the grip of terrorism and separatist organizations, remains dire. In application of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), we hope to advance the political process and achieve national reconciliation. We are sincerely determined to pursue our position in favour of realistic dialogue.
Our neighbour Iraq, while continuing its fight against terrorism, is taking decisive steps towards development, reconstruction and reintegration with its region. The international community must support these efforts. In this context, it is important to implement such initiatives as the Development Road project, which will benefit the entire region on a win-win basis. The success of such efforts depends on the complete elimination of the terrorist threat in Iraq, in particular the Kurdistan Workers’ Party.
We are strengthening our common action plan in the region with another neighbour of ours, Iran, in order to establish stability and peace, which will contribute tremendously to our efforts.
The war in Ukraine has been raging for three years, and we are still far from establishing permanent peace and stability there. As the arms race accelerates, the space for diplomacy is shrinking. It is crucial that diplomacy and dialogue protect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, and Türkiye’s endeavours to that end will continue and grow even stronger. During this process we are committed to rigorously implementing the 1936 Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits.
We support the peace process between Azerbaijan and Armenia and hope that it will be concluded as soon as possible with a positive outcome. We support continued high-level contacts between the two countries, with a focus on dialogue. We are also taking mutually supportive steps on the Türkiye-Armenia track, with the expectation that progress in the Azerbaijan-Armenia peace process will have a positive impact on the Türkiye-Armenia normalization process.
We play a constructive role in the peace and prosperity of the Balkans, of which we are an integral part, and we act in close cooperation with all actors in the region. As a member of the Steering Committee of the Peace Implementation Council, we emphasize the importance of the sovereignty, political unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina in every platform and continue our contribution to European Union military operation there. We are successfully continuing the command of the Kosovo Force we assumed last year and supporting the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue process.
We want to see the Aegean Sea and the eastern Mediterranean as a zone of stability and prosperity where the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned are respected. It is in the common interest of the entire region to enhance cooperation, particularly on the delimitation of maritime jurisdictions, in accordance with international law and the freedom and safety of navigation and maritime trade. International maritime law encourages cooperation between littoral States in closed or semi-closed seas, such as the Aegean Sea.
Türkiye is also ready for constructive cooperation on all issues, especially those related to energy and the environment. We have the longest coastline in the eastern Mediterranean, where Türkiye’s key role is undeniable.
Türkiye has legitimate rights and authority in the western part of the island of Cyprus, while the Turkish Cypriots have legitimate rights in the areas around the island as a whole. It has been 50 years since the United Nations Peacekeeping Force arrived in Cyprus and 61 years since the Cyprus issue emerged following the Greek Cypriot usurpation of the partnership State. From that day until now, peace and tranquillity have prevailed on the island. It has always been Türkiye and the Turkish Cypriots who have shown a sincere desire to bring about a just, lasting and sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue. The federation model is now completely outdated, and we fully support the vision of a two-State solution, with two separate nations, put forward by the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Sovereign equality and equal international status, which are the inherent right of the Turkish Cypriots, must be reaffirmed, and their isolation must end. Today I once again call on the international community to recognize the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and establish diplomatic, political and economic relations with it.
We actively support the efforts to stabilize Libya and preserve its unity and territorial integrity. We call on all States to stand in solidarity with Libya at this very sensitive time and to contribute to building trust between the parties.
We must do more to end the conflict in the Sudan. We all have a responsibility to deliver humanitarian assistance to the millions of Sudanese displaced by the conflict.
With its young and dynamic population, rich natural resources and vast, fertile lands, Africa has enormous potential. Hand in hand with the peoples of Africa, and based on the principles of equal partnership and mutual respect, we support the continent’s efforts for peace, stability and development. We will continue to stand in full solidarity with our African brothers and sisters.
As part of our initiatives, we are strengthening our deep-rooted ties with Asia. We are expanding our engagement with our regional partner organizations such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Pacific Islands Forum. We are maintaining our commitment to developing our relations with the group that includes Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, the BRICS countries, which are bringing emerging economies together. We share a deep-rooted history with the countries of Central Asia and are further strengthening our cooperation on bilateral and multilateral grounds. The Organization of Turkic States is gradually becoming a centre of attraction and an exemplary model of cooperation with the contributions of its observer members, Hungary and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. We will continue to further strengthen our unity and solidarity as the Turkic world. Within a framework of respect for China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, we are engaging in close dialogue with China to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of the Uyghur Turks there, with whom we have strong historical, cultural and human ties. We are also endeavouring to build on the friendly ties we have established with all countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It is crucial that we work together to address global injustice. The concept central to the Sustainable Development Goals, that of leaving no one behind, is a guiding principle for those efforts. As one of the countries providing the largest amount of assistance relative to its gross domestic product, through its development cooperation activities Türkiye is contributing to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. We contribute to efforts aimed at ensuring fair, inclusive growth and development through all international platforms, especially the Group of 20, of which we are a member.
We see technological breakthroughs such as artificial intelligence as a potential source not of injustice and conflict but a more prosperous future, and we believe that all nations should benefit equally from the transformative power of such breakthrough technologies. The United Nations Technology Bank for the Least Developed Countries, which we host, is a concrete manifestation of our efforts in that regard. Unfortunately, last week’s cyberterror attacks in Lebanon showed once again how those technologies can be turned into deadly weapons.
We are taking a similar approach to climate change. No country can tackle emission reductions and adapt to climate change on its own. The most important issues for developing countries are financing, technology transfer and capacity-building. I firmly believe that the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Baku, will help to solve those problems. At the Conference we expect to present Türkiye’s important initiatives on the international stage, including our long-term low-emissions development strategy and our Zero Waste Project, launched under the auspices of my wife, Emine Erdoğan. Through mutual agreements we are putting our domestic initiatives on the international agenda, and I would like to invite everyone to support our endeavours in that regard.
Islamophobia, xenophobia and racism are spreading around the world like poison ivy. Almost every week we are seeing attacks on our mosques and our holy book, the Qur’an. In the middle of Europe, people’s houses are being set on fire, their lives targeted and their most basic rights blatantly violated because of their ethnic or religious identities. No one can ignore that growing danger any longer. As stipulated in resolution 78/264, adopted on 15 March, we expect to see the appointment of a special envoy to combat Islamophobia at the United Nations as soon as possible.
Today I would like to once again draw the General Assembly’s attention to a danger that I raised from this rostrum last year (see A/78/PV.4). Attacks on the institution of the family, a basic pillar of society, are intensifying. The disgrace staged during the opening ceremony of the 2024 Olympic Games has revealed the dimensions of the threat we face as humankind. That sporting event, watched by innocent children and hundreds of millions of people of all ages and faiths, was used as a tool for propaganda about gender in a very ugly way. That disturbing parade of evil scenes wounded not only the Catholic, Christian and Muslim worlds but those of everyone who respects sacred values. Addressing the issue of perverting gender is no longer a choice but a global imperative. This is literally a war on sacred values and human nature. We are dealing with a comprehensive, ruthless project of destruction, and anyone who speaks out against or shows the slightest reaction to it is silenced and targeted by lynching campaigns. Türkiye is determined to break that siege and resist the climate of fear at all costs. To that end we have become a member of the Group of Friends of the Family. God willing, together with other member countries, we will not hesitate to defend the family, human beings and human nature. I invite every country that shares our sentiments to take on that struggle.
With those thoughts in mind, I hope that the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly will be a beneficial one for all humankind. Once again I salute everyone with love and respect and wish all of us peace and good health.
