I am humbled and indeed honoured to stand before the General Assembly today for the first time as the Prime Minister of Tuvalu. I bring to the Assembly and the related high-level summits the best wishes of my people and the Government of Tuvalu.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. President Philemon Yang on assuming the role of President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. Tuvalu wishes him a very successful presidency.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the outgoing President, Mr. Dennis Francis, for a job well done and for his exceptional leadership during his presidency.
I applaud President Yang’s insightful vision for this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. The theme challenges us to work in unison to advance peace and security, sustainable development and human dignity. Considering how off-track the progress of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is, it is a timely and pragmatic call. We must therefore advance in unity as a family of nations.
However, it is imperative to recognize the inherent disparity in our respective development capacities. The least developed countries (LDCs) and small island developing States (SIDS), trailing at the lower end of the global economic scale, face persistent and significant financial challenges in their development efforts. For Tuvalu, a purely import-oriented economy, our economic fragility is further compounded by poor natural endowment, geographical isolation from major markets and environmental vulnerability to climatic crises.
The President’s vision to promote human dignity at this critical moment is highly commendable. Ensuring that all individuals have access to resources and opportunities to participate in international decision-making processes is crucial for a just and effective response to those global challenges. In that regard, it is regrettable that the Republic of China on Taiwan continues to be excluded from the United Nations system, despite its significant contributions and partnerships across various development sectors. Resolution 2758 (XXVI) does not preclude Taiwan’s meaningful participation in the United Nations system and therefore must include Taiwan, so that no one is left behind. As a vibrant democracy that has made remarkable progress on the SDGs, Taiwan is well positioned to make meaningful contributions to global efforts in achieving those goals.
It is also regrettable to observe that the people of Cuba continue to bear the economic burden of long-standing unilateral economic blockades. Through such measures, Cuba is denied the crucial international development assistance and partnerships necessary to its recovery and rebuilding efforts. Tuvalu aligns itself with Member States that support the lifting of those blockades and joins other Member States’ call for the removal of Cuba from the list of State sponsors of terrorism.
Tuvalu applauds the Secretary-General and his team for their tireless efforts in the organization of several important high-level meetings this week. Tuvalu also commends the commitments and constructive contributions of all Member States that enabled the success of those meetings.
Tuvalu welcomes and supports the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), adopted earlier this week at the Summit of the Future, together with the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations (resolution 79/1, annexes I and II). What is needed now is robust political will and unwavering commitment to implementing the provisions of the Pact. We are heartened by the Pact’s call for a bold and comprehensive outcome document on addressing climate change at the upcoming twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Azerbaijan.
While climate change affects every nation, its impacts are disproportionately felt more by small island developing States like Tuvalu. Despite our insignificant contribution to climate change, we face the most severe consequences when climate-induced disasters do occur. We therefore urge all Member States to honour their commitments to increasing support for climate financing and technology transfer to help nations like Tuvalu develop and enhance their adaptative resilience.
The science is very clear that atmospheric temperatures continue to rise due to the increasing emission of greenhouse gases from burning fossil fuels. Therefore, phasing out fossil fuels is crucial to global efforts to reduce carbon emissions and curb global warming. Towards that objective, Tuvalu and several other like-minded nations are leading the promotion of the fossil fuel non-proliferation treaty initiative. The initiative is to garner international support for a binding treaty arrangement that would regulate and limit the use of fossil fuel, with the ultimate objective of total phase out. I take this opportunity to invite other States Members of the United Nations family to support the initiative.
I express the sincere hope that the commitments contained in the Pact will provide a much-needed reboot to the global multilateralism architecture and the United Nations system generally. Tuvalu supports and look forward to the effective implementation of the Pact for the Future to build a more equitable global system in which no nation and no community is left behind.
Climate change-induced sea level rise is and will always be a top priority for Tuvalu. Sea level rise is not only a top development priority but also a top survivability priority for Tuvalu. The Pacific Ocean that used to define would soon engulf us and determine our future existence if sea level rise is not halted and Tuvalu’s coastlines are not suitably fortified and reinforced. Sea level rise is a global and multidimensional phenomenon that requires immediate global actions.
For Tuvalu, sea level rise poses the greatest existential threat to our economy, culture and heritage and to the land that nourished our ancestors for centuries. Current predictions of the rate of sea level rise are frighteningly disturbing. The predictions are that by 2050, in 26 years’ time, more than 50 per cent of Tuvalu’s land territory will be regularly flooded by regular tidal surges. Fifty years later, in 2100, more than 90 per cent of Tuvalu’s land territory will suffer the same fate. The predictions do not account for severe climatic conditions like cyclones and hurricanes, which would exponentially accelerate the reaching of those thresholds.
Tuvalu therefore commends the President for the timely and successful organization of the High-Level Meeting on Sea Level Rise on Wednesday. Tuvalu is heartened by the commitment of all Member States to strengthening international cooperation and partnerships for more comprehensive and effective responses to sea level rise. We are committed to providing the Secretary-General with our national report on that issue within the suggested timeframe and look forward to contributing to a concise, action-oriented and intergovernmentally negotiated declaration.
The High-Level Meeting marked the take-off of our global effort to shape an ambitious declaration of the General Assembly in September 2026. The declaration, in my considered view, must be a strong pronouncement in support of the expectations of the 1 billion people affected by sea level rise. The declaration shall be an unwavering commitment to our sovereignty, dignity, prosperity and rights. The declaration must be action-oriented and comprehensive. Towards those objectives, we expect the declaration to include the following principles.
First, the declaration shall ascertain the principle of statehood continuity as a tenet of international law and international cooperation and affirm that statehood cannot be challenged under any circumstances of sea level rise.
Secondly, the declaration shall reaffirm the permanency of maritime zones established in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Thirdly, the declaration shall call on the international community and regional institutions to enable human mobility pathways that facilitate movement in a safe, orderly and dignified manner.
Fourthly, the declaration shall devise concrete programmes for the international community to support our efforts to safeguard our unique culture and heritage, both tangible and intangible.
Fifthly, the declaration shall establish dedicated and innovative financing mechanisms to support the positive adaptation journeys of the most vulnerable communities.
Finally, the declaration shall underscore the importance of knowledge, data and science to anticipate and plan for the impacts of sea level rise.
I wish to reiterate the commitment of Tuvalu to addressing the effects of climate change through identified, science-based, transformative and adaptive solutions. Those solutions are designed to reclaim and elevate land, enhance our resilience against sea level rise and ensure that our sovereign rights to our land and cultural identity are safe and protected for our future generation.
I acknowledge the efforts of the Pacific peoples in addressing the pressing issue of sea level rise. The Pacific leaders ,in their annual meeting in Tonga last month, reiterated the importance of the 2021 Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise and the 2023 Declaration on the Continuity of Statehood and the Protection of Persons in the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level Rise. The Pacific leaders also called for sea level rise to be a stand-alone item on the General Assembly’s agenda and other related United Nations processes, such as the Conferences of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Furthermore, in 2021, Tuvalu, in collaboration with Antigua and Barbuda, established the Commission of Small Island States on Climate Change and International Law. In May, the Commission successfully secured an advisory opinion from the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea that clarifies that greenhouse gas emissions pollute the marine environment and that States have the legal responsibilities to take all necessary measures to prevent, reduce and control them. The advisory opinion is a significant development, as it shifts the conversation from political commitments to binding legal obligations.
The science on climate change is comprehensive and clear that the climate is changing and is significantly impacting small islands through rising sea levels. Nationalized scientific data and information has allowed my Government to create a 3D model that specifically demonstrates the impacts of climate change and sea level rise in Tuvalu. We showcased the 3D model here in New York during the high-level week. I must admit that it is alarming and disturbing to see how quickly Tuvalu’s entire land territory will be engulfed by rising seas as greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase.
I am pleased to share with the General Assembly a watershed treaty between Tuvalu and Australia, the Falepili Union Treaty. The Treaty carries the title of the treasured Tuvalu value of falepili, which connotes good-neighbourliness, caring and sharing, and mutual respect. The Treaty is firmly grounded on mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence. The Treaty prioritizes three key areas, namely, climate cooperation, mobility with dignity and shared security.
For the first time, there is a country — Australia — that has committed legally to come to the aid of Tuvalu, upon request, when Tuvalu encounters a major natural disaster, when Tuvalu is experiencing a major public health pandemic or when Tuvalu is subjected to some form of military aggression. For the first time also, another country — Australia — is legally committed to recognizing the permanency of the future statehood and sovereignty of Tuvalu, despite the impacts of climate change, particularly sea level rise. The Treaty also provides for a mobility pathway for citizens of Tuvalu who chose to live, work and study in Australia. I very much look forward to the full operationalization of the Falepili Union Treaty next year, in 2025.
Let me reiterate Tuvalu’s unwavering support for the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, which was adopted in May. The Agenda addresses the unique challenges faced by small island developing States through a multifaceted approach that includes climate action, economic diversification and social development.
Tuvalu is one of the smallest States in the world in terms of its land territory and population, but it is a very large ocean State because of the extent of its exclusive economic zone. Tuvaluans therefore have a very close affinity with the Pacific Ocean. The Pacific Ocean sustains our daily lives and economic prosperity. The impacts of climate change on fish stock migration and declining marine resources, together with illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and marine pollution, pose a major challenge to Tuvalu’s progress towards sustainable economic development.
As a signatory of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, Tuvalu is committed to the sustainable utilization and equitable distribution of marine resources. Tuvalu is also committed to the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, which is aimed at protecting the ocean. That commitment is reinforced by United Nations Environment Assembly resolution 5/14, which calls for the development of an ambitious, international, legally binding agreement to end plastic pollution, based on a comprehensive approach that addresses the full life cycle of plastic, including its production, design and disposal.
Tuvalu expresses its sincere gratitude to the Economic and Social Council for its consideration of deferring Tuvalu’s graduation from the least developed country category earlier this year. It is important to reiterate that, while Tuvalu has met the graduation thresholds for some time now, it continues to have serious reservations about leaving the group. As one of the last remaining Pacific Island countries in the LDC category, Tuvalu is exceptionally vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and rising sea levels. Even the Committee for Development Policy has recognized that Tuvalu’s vulnerability to climate change is not only severe but permanent. For that reason, Tuvalu applauds the newly developed multidimensional vulnerability index, which could complement the traditional gross national income indicator as the basis for development and climate finance access.
Tuvalu commends the commemoration and promotion of the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons this year. The event serves as a powerful reminder of the catastrophic consequences of nuclear testing and warfare, as well as the ongoing threat posed by those weapons. By observing the event annually, as agreed in resolution 78/27, reinforces our commitment to nuclear disarmament. Tuvalu is a party the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
I am also pleased to announce that in June, Tuvalu became one of the few remaining States to accede to the Biological Weapons Convention, further solidifying our steadfast commitment to creating a world safe from nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
Twelve months ago, we adopted the Political Declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage (resolution 78/4, annex), following a review of the implementation of the 2019 Political Declaration of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage, entitled “Universal health coverage: moving together to build a healthier world”. This year’s adoption of the Political Declaration of the high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance (resolution 79/2, annex) has once again unified us in a concerted global effort to build a healthier world. As unified as we ought to be, achieving equitable and adequate essential health-care services for all must remained a common priority. International cooperation remains appropriate to efforts to improve and strengthen health care systems, particularly those that are lagging.
On 5 September, Tuvalu celebrated its twenty-fourth anniversary of membership of the United Nations. It has been over two decades since Tuvalu joined the Organization as the 189th Member State. Tuvalu remains grateful for the privilege to engage with other Member States in our common pursuit of the advancement of peace and security, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations.
Next week, 1 October will be the forty-sixth anniversary of Tuvalu’s independence. As I prepare to celebrate that momentous occasion for the first time as Prime Minister of Tuvalu, I wish to express my special appreciation and gratitude to the United Nations and its Member States, in particular Tuvalu’s generous traditional and emerging partners, for all the support and assistance afforded to my country.
In conclusion, I render Tuvalu’s unwavering support for the Pact for the Future and the accompanying Declaration and Compact, adopted at the Summit of the Future earlier in the week. I express the sincere and genuine hope that the commitments contained in the Pact provide the much-needed reboot to the global multilateralism architecture and the United Nations system generally.
The global community must seize this opportunity to reaffirm and recommit to multilateralism and international cooperation, to the Sustainable Development Goals and to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Tuvalu calls on the global community to rally behind the Pact for the Future and to build a more equitable global system where no nation and no community is left behind, particularly those nations on the front line of the devastative impacts of climate change and climate changed-induced sea level rise, like my country, Tuvalu.
