On behalf of Ms. Samia Suluhu Hassan, President of the United Republic of Tanzania, I stand before the Assembly to deliver a message of hope and peace to the people of the world. In doing so, I wish to convey warm and fraternal greetings from the President and the people of the United Republic of Tanzania. Ms. Samia Suluhu Hassan, President of the United Republic of Tanzania, wishes the Assembly every success in its important deliberations.
I would also like to join previous speakers in commending Mr. Philemon Yang for the excellent manner in which he is steering the work of the Assembly. Tanzania endorses and supports the theme chosen for this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”. The theme aligns well with the Charter of the United Nations and builds on the efforts of President Yang’s predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, whose remarkable leadership is truly appreciated.
Tanzania recognizes and thanks the Secretary-General for his great work and the important message he shared with us at the opening of the general debate (see A/79/PV.7).
Our participation in the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly has been a unique opportunity for us to share perspectives regarding the pledges and commitments made to addressing global challenges such as pandemics, extreme poverty, climate change and conflicts. I would like to share some of Tanzania’s perspectives, as follows.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a beacon of hope in addressing global challenges. Tanzania’s journey towards sustainable development reflects that of many nations facing significant challenges from the detrimental impacts of coronavirus disease on health and economic systems. Climate change, marked by extreme weather patterns such as torrential rains and droughts, has exacerbated health issues and strained infrastructure. We are concerned about the slow pace in attaining the Goals, whereby, as of 2023, only 17 per cent of targets were on track, with over a one-third regressing or stalling. Urgent actions and global solidarity are needed to overcome barriers such as economic imbalances, climate change, conflicts and gender inequality.
Our commitments to the realization of SDGs are focused on sustainable economic growth through strategic investments in agriculture, aquaculture, livestock, fisheries, infrastructure development, energy and digital technology. Our goal is to improve food security, reduce poverty, ensure job creation and drive inclusive economic growth. There are many success stories in Tanzania emanating from that investment, such as the empowerment of youth through the Building Better Tomorrow agricultural initiative in mainland Tanzania and the empowerment of local women in Zanzibar through seaweed farming.
On the other hand, Tanzania implements policies to ensure access to quality health care and education for all citizens, including the Universal Health Insurance Act and free basic education. The Government also invests in vocational training and education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics to prepare young people for the job market and digital economy.
For decades, Tanzania’s foreign policy has prioritized respect for human dignity. Addressing the Assembly on 14 December 1961, Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere, the then Prime Minister of Tanganyika, stated that,
“The basis of our actions, internal and external, will be an attempt, an honest
attempt, to honour the dignity of man” (A/PV.1078, para. 140).
Tanzania has maintained that pledge by leading the fight against colonialism and racism. In that regard, Tanzania hosted the Organization of African Union Liberation Committee, supporting freedom fighters in their struggles for independence. Despite gaining political liberation, many countries still face economic sanctions and inhumane conditions that hinder the achievement of genuine development. We call therefore for the realization of the right to self-determination of all peoples under colonial occupation and the lifting of economic sanctions imposed against them. The Assembly must continue to more boldly call for the lifting of economic sanctions imposed on the people of Cuba and other countries so as to allow the people of those countries to realize their basic rights, including the right to development.
Global humanitarian crises due to war, conflict and natural disaster require unrestricted access to humanitarian aid, the fair treatment of victims, accountability for atrocities and the United Nations commitment to upholding human dignity for a peaceful world. Tanzania believes that every individual deserves to live in dignity, freedom and security in order to reach their full potential. The United Nations must not remain indifferent to those situations, as doing so would only undermine its legitimacy.
Security is indivisible and peace is critical to achieving development. In the face of global health threats, characterized by pandemics such as the coronavirus disease and the current mpox, the saying that “no one is safe until everyone is safe” truly earns its meaning. It is imperative that we invest more in peace, foster unity and rebuild trust. In that regard, Tanzania welcomes the adoption of resolution 78/312, which proclaims 7 July as World Kiswahili Language Day. Kiswahili, a language spoken by over 200 million people in all continents of the world, is an important tool for advancing peace, unity and cultural diversity. While Tanzania and other Kiswahili-speaking countries look forward to commemorating the Day in 2025 and beyond, we also call on the Assembly to explore the possibility of recognizing Kiswahili as the seventh official language of our Organization. The African Union, the East African Community, the Southern African Development Community and the African Union have already led the way in the speaking of Kiswahili.
It is important that we invest more in peace initiatives because there is no development without peace and unity. In recognition of that requirement, Tanzania has for several decades participated in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and mediation efforts. Tanzania has contributed and continues to contribute towards world peace through its membership of the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. That contribution is also evident through its leadership in regional arrangements, such as the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and, currently, as the chairing of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security of the Southern African Development Community. I wish to reassure the Assembly that Tanzania’s commitment to peace will not weaken. Tanzania will continue to diligently dispense the obligations emanating from the Charter of the United Nations.
Tanzania, like many other developing countries, is highly vulnerable to droughts, floods, desertification and the effects of sea level rise. It is estimated that the sea level will rise by 41 centimetres by 2080. While sea level rise cannot be reversed, Tanzania is taking several adaptation and mitigation measures, including the restoration and plantation of mangroves, the enhancement of coastal infrastructure and the promotion of ecotourism and aquaculture. It is imperative, therefore, that we invest more in climate finance to help economies that are already suffering from those effects to recover and to enhance access to funding for loss and damage in the hardest-hit countries.
As we prepare for the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Baku, it is worth remembering that globally, an estimated 2.4 billion people are still using polluting fuels for cooking. That contributes to health problems, food insecurity, gender inequality and environmental damage, including millions of premature deaths, limited access to education and employment for women and children, and increased greenhouse gas emissions and deforestation. Achieving universal clean cooking access in Africa by 2030 would require an estimated amount of $4 billion annually, a small fraction of global energy spending.
In response to that alarming situation, Tanzania is championing a clean cooking agenda that essentially contributes to several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including Goal 7, focusing on ensuring access to affordable and sustainable energy for all. Tanzania will host the Mission 300 Africa Energy Summit in January 2025, co-organized with the World Bank and the African Development Bank. The Summit will seek to accelerate the implementation of the commitment of the World Bank Group and the African Development Bank Group to providing electricity access to 300 million people in Africa by 2030. We look forward to working together with all partners to unlock energy potential and build a brighter, more resilient future for Africa.
In November, Tanzania will hold local Government elections, followed by presidential and parliamentary elections in October next year. As we prepare for those electoral events, I wish to assure the Assembly that democracy, human rights and the rule of law will be upheld in line with President Samia Suluhu Hassan’s vision, as captured in the four Rs philosophy, namely: reconciliation, resilience, reforms and rebuilding. Since the announcement of the four R principles in 2021, the Government of Tanzania has continued to foster harmony and promote unity across political, religious and ethnic divides. In implementation of the four Rs, the Government has also undertaken several monumental reforms that seek to address shortfalls within the criminal justice system, allow for effective political processes and enhance the enjoyment of human rights.
Reforms are crucial for countries and international organizations to stay relevant and for greater inclusiveness, transparency, and accountability, especially in multilateral bodies like the Security Council and the Bretton Woods institutions. Tanzania remains committed to rebuilding its economy and society, focusing on inclusivity and empowering its citizens for a stronger future.
In conclusion, Tanzania urges all world leaders to unite against international threats that undermine unity, peace and human dignity. We are obliged to work towards the goal, stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, of sparing succeeding generations from the scourge of war. We must stop wars and destruction that cause death and wanton suffering to innocent civilians, including women and children.
Let us leverage innovation, adopt inclusive policies and strengthen international cooperation in accelerating the implementation of the SDGs. Together, let us build partnerships that transcend borders, ensuring that no one is left behind. Let us undertake the necessary reforms to make our multilateral institutions fit for purpose. Let us rebuild trust and reconcile our differences. Let us cooperate to build the resilience of our institutions and peoples. We can achieve the future we want if we commit to rebuilding and restoring what has been damaged by our past actions. As we look to the future, let us honour the commitments made in various international forums. Together, let us embrace this moment with optimism and a shared dedication to inclusivity.
