I bring warm greetings from Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, and the people of Uganda.
I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and assure him of Uganda’s full support.
I commend Mr. Dennis Francis, former President of the General Assembly, for his stewardship of the seventy-eighth session and equally pay tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres for his commitment to the work of the United Nations.
In the face of the current global shocks occasioned by multiple human, natural, ecological, sociological and financial crises, we can all agree that the world is not in a good place. Today, the negative consequences of disunity have given rise to conflicts, global instability and inter-State rivalry and have exacerbated the already existing problems of poverty, hunger and disease in many parts of the world. There is therefore need to recommit ourselves to a common identity of shared humanity in the modern global village.
As peoples of the United Nations, we should live by the Charter of the United Nations with a sincere determination to save future generations from the scourge of war. We should fully commit ourselves to upholding the dignity and worth of the human person for peaceful coexistence and tolerance, regardless of our differences in values, cultures, race, ideologies and religions, without political-military threats or dominion by war. We must resolve our political commitment to the full implementation of globally agreed frameworks for the promotion of socioeconomic development and advancement of all people. In that regard, urgent action is required to address global inequalities with regard to poverty, hunger and disease, which continue to disproportionally affect the poorest and most vulnerable.
Therefore, this is the time to ask the following questions. First, why have we failed to forge stronger international cooperation in response to collective global challenges? Secondly, why is it that, in spite of the multiple global commitments derived through consensually formulated resolutions, decisions and commitments, they all remain unimplemented? This year’s session of the General Assembly, unlike others, should seek to answer those questions.
We are all aware that most conflict drivers begin as unresolved local or regional tensions or problems that become increasingly complex, sometimes involving multiple actors. Regional conflicts must be addressed comprehensively beyond security, with the need for broad and strong political commitments on the part of regional Governments. Uganda believes in the peaceful resolution of conflicts wherever they occur. We are at the forefront of promoting the regional peace, security and stability necessary for economic development.
In that respect, Uganda encourages international partners to support local and region-led initiatives or solutions for building peace and stability as prerequisites for sustained and inclusive economic growth and development in our countries and regions. We call for increased collaboration by the international community to eliminate or reduce the incidence of conflicts caused by factors such as inequality, climate change, pandemics, new technologies, transnational organized crime and terrorism. Uganda believes that the benefits of this world must be shared with all humankind and detests all forms of exclusion by the relatively few wealth nations. We reject the increasing competition and confrontation between major powers, which undermines the collective international responses to security, peace, stability and social economic development.
Uganda reiterates its call for the urgent and comprehensive reform of the Security Council and for Africa to be represented in both the permanent and non-permanent categories as a special case in order to address the historical injustice and the urgent imperative to address it, and fully supports the Common African Position on that matter. The African Union Committee of Ten Heads of State and Government, under the leadership of the Republic of Sierra Leone, has been pursuing the mandate to promote, advocate and canvass for support of the Common African Position on the reform of the Security Council, as stipulated in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. The position is that Africa should have two permanent seats with a veto if others have it and two additional non-permanent Seats on the Security Council.
Since 2005, the Committee of Ten has been driven by the hope for and conviction in sovereign equality in representation and participation in intergovernmental negotiations for the reform of the Security Council in order to make it more responsive to current circumstances towards achieving a future of shared goals for humankind. The core aspiration is for Africa to get representation in the Security Council as an equal partner and to make a contribution to a multilateral system that should become inclusive and equitable and work for the international peace and security of all, without paralysis or succumbing to the parochial interests of major Powers.
We demand the right to development as equal members of the international community, without any preconditions or politicization, for greater human dignity, freedom and socioeconomic justice. We call for fair access to means of production, technology and capital for the social economic transformation of our economies, in line with our national legal frameworks and development plans. Uganda believes that the perpetual preservation of poverty and inequalities in developing countries undermines fundamental human rights, in particular the rights of the marginalized and poor, and remains a threat to international peace and security, which should no longer be overlooked. Uganda, as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, will work with countries of the Movement, as well as other countries, on the intergovernmental processes that shall lead to the adoption of the United Nations covenant on the right to development.
Financing remains one of the greatest challenges that undermine the efforts of developing countries to fully implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the achievement of its 17 Sustainable Development Goals. Borrowing is critical to financing investments in sustainable development. Sovereign debt is an important tool for financing sustainable development, enabling low-income countries to invest in infrastructure, health care, education and other critical areas. We emphasize that loans to low-income developing countries should be concessional and at a zero interest rate. That will enable our countries to finance productive investments, including building infrastructure to improve connectivity, make debt sustainable in the long-run and spur economic growth that will in turn help to improve domestic tax collection and raise revenues.
Uganda, like other developing countries, faces constraints of domestic resource mobilization due to a limited tax base. We call for the strengthening of international cooperation in tax matters to ensure that it is effective and inclusive by making multinational corporations pay taxes in countries of their operations, including collections of revenue generated by e-commerce in cross-border transactions. We fully support ongoing discussions on the adoption of a United Nations framework convention on international tax cooperation and call upon all countries to negotiate constructively.
We also call for the strengthening of international cooperation in preventing and combating illicit financial flows with a view to ensuring that all illicit funds or resources, including assets, are returned to their countries of origin. Furthermore, Uganda calls for the urgent reform of the international financial architecture, including the international financial institutions and their rules, to ensure the equitable representation of developing countries in international economic governance decision-making that affects the trajectory of their national development.
Uganda has identified four key sectors of wealth and job creation, in line with its national development plan — agro-processing, industrialization, services and information and communication technologies, and digitization and skills development — to support our socioeconomic transformation. There is no doubt that affordable energy and access to affordable high-quality Internet connectivity are vital to catalysing their full implementation in order to realize inclusive development outcomes and benefits for our people.
We need to strengthen deeper collaboration with the global South, with the support of our partners in the North, to unlock shared prosperity by building the infrastructure and connectivity necessary to increasing productive capacity for rapid growth, economic take-off and sustainable development. In that regard, Uganda calls on the international community to support the full implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area.
Furthermore, Uganda calls on the international community to support its path to sustainable development. We encourage foreign individuals and companies to invest in the country. We welcome inflows of money, technology, knowledge, skills and expertise as major sources of non-debt financial resources for the economic development of our country. Uganda also calls for the collaboration of the international community in medical research for global health to develop vaccines and treatments to combat diseases like Ebola, the coronavirus disease and mpox, and to improve health-care capability in low-income countries, particularly in Africa.
Uganda advocates for mutually beneficial trade and investment. We encourage that, in the pursuit of sustainable development, foreign direct investments be geared to adding value by processing raw materials inside our country, where raw materials are produced, and to exporting high-value products. That will create jobs, generate high incomes and increase taxable revenues. We call on multinational companies to desist from purchasing raw materials and selling only processed products for consumption in developing countries. We also call on developed economies and multinational companies that buy raw materials and then process them and add value in their own countries to take measures to institute policies that allow the sharing of the profits they generate in the value chain with the low-income, raw material-producing countries where those raw materials are sourced, for shared prosperity.
Climate change remains one of the greatest challenges to the pursuit of sustainable development. Uganda calls on developed countries to provide the financing, technology and capacity-building necessary to support developing countries in effectively addressing climate change. We demand climate justice, recognizing that richer countries, having historically profited from high-emission activities for the development of their economies, bear a greater obligation to lead in mitigating those impacts. Therefore, the high-income countries should reduce their emissions and support developing countries in their gradual transition to low-emission development pathways, without using the environment as a political and economic tool to block or slow their development. We emphasize that climate financing should be additional to official development assistance.
Developing countries face great challenges, including the increase in unilateral political, economic and trade actions or policies and the weakening of multilateralism, which are flagrant violations of the principles established in the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the purposes of the United Nations. We consider it urgent to stop actions that threaten the economic and social development of the countries that are subject to them and, consequently, prevent them from achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Uganda reiterates its call for an end to the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed on the sisterly nations under sanctions, which is a major impediment to their sustainable development. Uganda also reiterates its firm rejection of the imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other forms of coercive measures, including unilateral sanctions, against developing countries and reiterates the urgent need to eliminate them immediately.
Uganda assumed the chairmanship of both the Group of 77 and China and the Non-Aligned Movement in January. I take this opportunity, on behalf of Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, to thank all States members of the Group and the Movement for their confidence in entrusting Uganda in the capacity of Chair. We commend the Group of African States for endorsing our candidature for the chairmanship of both organizations.
This year, 2024, has been a crucial one for various intergovernmental processes at the United Nations on issues that are of paramount importance to both the Group and the Movement. Those include, inter-alia, the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States, the third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, the Summit of the Future, and preparations for the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development and the twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, all of which demand that we remain even more united and steadfast in promoting the interests of developing countries. Uganda therefore commends the members of both groups for remaining united in solidarity as we pursue the issues of our common interests.
In conclusion, Uganda will continue with that stewardship, working together in solidarity to achieve a revitalized multilateral system that is capable of adequately addressing current and emerging global challenges. We firmly believe that multilateralism remains a fundamental and crucial mechanism for addressing our common challenges, namely, the acceleration of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the scaling-up of action to address climate change and biodiversity loss, the strengthening of international tax cooperation, the provision of adequate concessional financing for development, and the fight against illicit financial flows and enhancing global collaboration in digital and artificial technologies to maximize the benefits to society and minimize harm, among others.
