Today I want to tell you about a day that is already past, and a day that must never come. On the night of 4 March 2022, I received one of the most terrifying reports that I had had since the full-scale Russian invasion against Ukraine began. According to the report, Russian tanks were firing directly on the buildings of our Ukrainian nuclear power plant, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant — the largest in Europe, with six nuclear reactors. The Russian army stormed that facility just as brutally as they have any other during this war, without thinking about the consequences, which were possibly disastrous. That was one of the most horrifying moments of the war. No one could know how the Russian strikes on the nuclear facility would end, and everyone in Ukraine was reminded of what Chornobyl means. Now, unfortunately, the Zaporizhzhya plant remains occupied by Russian forces, and it is at risk of a nuclear incident. It is the major source of potential radiation danger in Europe and possibly the world. That is why the first point of the peace formula I presented is about nuclear safety. In Ukraine, we know exactly what we are dealing with, and I want to thank the members of the General Assembly for adopting a resolution in July on the safety of nuclear facilities in Ukraine (resolution 78/316). Most people around the world understand what is at stake. The General Assembly demanded that Russia return control of the Zaporizhzhya power plant to Ukraine. Only then will real nuclear security return to Europe and the world.
I now turn to the day that must never come. Since Russia cannot defeat our people’s resistance on the battlefield, Putin is looking for other ways to break the Ukrainian spirit. One of his methods is by targeting our energy infrastructure with deliberate attacks on our power plants and the entire energy grid. As of today, Russia has destroyed all of our thermal power plants and a large part of our hydroelectric capacity. That is how Putin is preparing for winter — hoping to torment millions of Ukrainians, ordinary families, women and children, in ordinary towns and villages. Putin wants to leave them in the dark and cold this winter, forcing Ukraine to suffer and surrender. I would like everyone here to imagine their country losing 80 per cent of its energy system. What kind of life would that be?
I recently received yet another alarming report from our intelligence. Putin now seems to be planning attacks on our nuclear power plants and their infrastructure and aiming to disconnect the plants from the power grid. With the help of satellites belonging to other countries, Russia is obtaining images and detailed information about the infrastructure of our nuclear power plants. But what does that really threaten? Any missile or drone strike, any critical incident in the energy system could lead to a nuclear disaster. A day like that must never come and Moscow needs to understand that. That depends, in part, on the Assembly’s determination to put pressure on the aggressor. These are nuclear power plants. They must be safe.
Two years ago, in the fall of 2022, I proposed a comprehensive strategy to end the war and ensure security. I presented the peace formula at a highly inclusive political platform for world leaders — the Group of 20 Summit in Indonesia — representing billions of citizens from all parts of the globe. It is important for us that all those people understand that Ukraine wants to end this war more than anyone in the world. War always poses a threat to many. We all see in the media and read in reports what is happening in Ukraine because of Russia’s war. It is something that many can imagine happening to themselves. And yes, the smoke from fires in war-torn cities can reach other countries. If, God forbid, Russia caused a nuclear disaster at one of our nuclear power plants, the radiation would not respect State borders. Unfortunately, various nations could feel the devastating effects.
But while many are concerned, the deepest understanding of war is always found in the home it destroys. It is the Ukrainian people who are feeling the full pain of this war. It is Ukrainian children who are learning to distinguish the sounds of different types of artillery and drones because of Russia’s war. It is our people who are forcibly separated by occupation because Putin decided he could do whatever he wants. It is our heroic soldiers who are giving their lives to defend our country from invaders trying to steal our land. That is why we say — and rightly — that there can be no just peace without Ukraine.
I thank every leader and country that supports us in that, that understands us and sees how Russia, a country more than 20 times larger than Ukraine in terms of territory, still wants even more land — which is insane — and is seizing it, day by day, while wanting to destroy its neighbour. Russia has found very special buddies for that purpose — North Korea and Iran, a telling choice of friends. Now every neighbour of Russia in Europe and Central Asia feels that the war could come to them as well. We can imagine what kind of losses that would mean for the world.
I thank the nearly 100 nations and international organizations that have supported the peace formula. It is truly a global community — in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, North America and the Pacific region — all united by the peace formula. I am glad that the first peace summit was so reminiscent of the General Assembly. Everyone was equal. No nation that participated in the peace summit, large or small, had veto rights or the authority to block anything. The participants included countries that have long been independent and some that gained independence only recently. There were countries that have been through wars themselves, and countries accustomed to peace. All were equal. That is what Russia hates the most and cannot control. That is why Russia says the peace formula does not suit it.
Here at the United Nations, I have already met with leaders from India, Guatemala, Japan, Italy, Türkiye, Finland, Canada, Paraguay, Slovenia, Germany and others, and my meetings will continue. Those countries represent different parts of the world and various political ways of life, but they share the same understanding, which is that peace is needed, and it must be a real, just peace. Unfortunately, at the United Nations it is impossible to truly and fairly resolve matters of war and peace because in the Security Council too much depends on the power of the veto. When the aggressor exercises the veto, the United Nations is powerless to stop the war. But the peace formula can stop it. That is because, once again, there is no veto power in it. That is why it is the best opportunity for peace. Everyone is equal, and it is effective and comprehensive. When some propose alternatives, such as half-hearted settlement plans — so-called sets of principles — they not only ignore both reality and the interests and suffering of Ukrainians, who are the most affected by the war, they also give Putin the political space to continue the war and pressure the world to bring more nations under control. Any parallel or alternative attempts to seek peace are in fact efforts to achieve a lull instead of an end to the war. As a global initiative, the peace formula has already existed for two years. Perhaps there is someone who wants a Nobel Prize for their political biography — through a frozen truce instead of a real peace — but the only prizes that Putin will give them in return are more suffering and disaster.
We must restore nuclear safety. Energy must stop being used as a weapon. We must ensure food security. We need to bring home all of our captured soldiers and civilians who have been forcibly deported to Russia. We must uphold the Charter of the United Nations and guarantee our right — Ukraine’s right — to territorial integrity and sovereignty, just as we do for any other nation. We need to withdraw the Russian occupiers, which will bring an end to the hostilities in Ukraine. We must hold those responsible for war crimes accountable. We need to prevent ecocide and stop the destruction of nature caused by the war. We must not allow a second or third phase of Russia’s invasion. And we need to make it clear that the war is over.
That is the peace formula. What part of that could be unacceptable to anyone who upholds the Charter? If anyone is seeking alternatives to any of those points or trying to ignore any of them, it likely means that they themselves want to take part in what Putin is doing — ignoring those points reveals the desire that they are hiding. And when the Chinese-Brazilian duo tries to expand into a choir of voices — with someone in Europe or Africa proposing some kind of alternative to a full and just peace — the question that arises is what their true interest is. It is important for all to understand that they cannot boost their own power at Ukraine’s expense.
The world has already been through colonial wars and conspiracies of great Powers at the expense of those that are smaller. Every country, including China, Brazil and nations in Europe, Africa and the Middle East, understands why that must remain in the past. And Ukrainians will never accept why anyone in the world would believe that such a brutal colonial past, which suits no one today, could now be imposed on Ukraine instead of a normal, peaceful life. I want peace for my people — real and just peace. I am asking for the support of every nation in the world. Ukraine does not divide the world. I ask the same of everyone here. I ask them not to divide the world. If we are nations united, that will bring us peace. Glory to Ukraine.
