As today is my last speech here as President, I take this opportunity to greet everyone and in particular the delegation of Uruguay, which has worked all these years as a team at the United Nations.
For my last statement, I was looking over previous statements I have delivered, in which there was a common thread in how I laid out my vision for our society in Uruguay and how States relate to each other. That is the concept of freedom with responsibility — responsible freedom. I would venture to say that the first cannot exist without the second. Life in society is about the development of the individual and at the same time the common good. That is what our Constitution has said ever since our country became independent. Of course, it has evolved over time with the changes in social customs.
It is impossible to understand humanity without understanding the concessions that individuals make for the common good. Essentially, we are social beings , and that ultimately impacts everyone, or at least it should. That is what has inspired me as President of my country and the spirit with which I have come to the Assembly. I am convinced that globalization will become further entrenched, which represents an excellent opportunity to understand and know ourselves better and to take advantage of the synergies created by the encounter of different cultures. That is possible when we are tolerant and respectful of those who may think differently from us.
At the same time, we must also deepen the criteria of freedom and justice, in particular here on the international stage. For that to happen, we must all strive to the best of our abilities to make concessions. Of course, that does not entail the loss of freedom, independence or sovereignty. At the same time, we also need fair mechanisms in which international law is applied to all equally, regardless of a country’s size or economic power. We must work together to build credible and robust international law. Agreements, treaties, conventions and documents that are signed but not implemented only weaken international law.
Of course, no country is obliged to participate in or belong to such organizations. That means that we can be and are critical of how our organizations work in certain ways. But what is the other option? It is to isolate ourselves. In this interconnected world, that would make no sense, so a large part of the freedom within our countries and in the international community and our ability to uphold justice falls on those who govern and leaders. In the modern world, where speeches lead to action, an important leader can with words alone generate positive or negative repercussions in her or his country or the international community. That means that we must be much more careful when we try to stimulate unity and not division within and beyond nations.
Political dynamics have led some leaders to exploit divisions as a tool to attain and stay in power. Clearly, it is one thing to defend one’s own beliefs and values or those shared by a group of individuals, and it is quite another thing to attack the beliefs and way of life of other communities. In some countries, that can undermine the practice of formal democracy in terms of elections, constitutions and laws, as well as the material democracy that citizens experience on a daily basis, and freedom can be affected.
I cannot fail to mention what is happening in Venezuela because, among other things, our position is not new. Fortunately, we have always kept our distance from that authoritarian and intolerant regime, which has attacked freedom and the common good. We all know what has been going on for some time in that country, while many Governments and world leaders have turned a blind eye, some out of a lack of interest, and some, regrettably, out of self-interest. I shall not go into the situation of the elections. Ultimately, one has to condemn the entire regime and not merely the distorted electoral process. We must also condemn the political persecution, the violations of human rights and the arbitrary detentions. I know that many Heads of State and Government have raised that issue. It seems to me that now is the time to act. We need to act for Venezuela and the Venezuelan people. If the international community tolerates such attitudes, it will only be a matter of time until the next country is subjected to a similar fate as the Venezuelans.
Another matter that I have touched upon in my previous statements here is the environment and the economy. In our vocation of caring for the environment, there is always a separation between the economy and the environment. I am pleased to see that, since I first came to the Assembly and heard speeches delivered by Heads of State on that matter, there has been a rather rapid evolution in that regard. We are now seeing how the economy and the environment are interlinked and that is excellent news for humankind.
As to sustainable financing, my country has been a pioneer in issuing instruments, such as green bonds or access to loans, pursuant to which fulfilling environmental goals and caring for the environment is tied to the performance of those financial products. That has had a very interesting domino effect because it helps States to access financing and also to care for the environment, but Governments can also reward producers and industry for creating a clean economy, or compel them to do so, and that will ultimately lead to greater prosperity in the future.
I mentioned a few minutes ago the concept of justice in international law. The law is sometimes applied differently in different cases, depending on who is involved. There are countries that pollute indiscriminately and others that are making major efforts to improve their processes and revive the ecosystem. If that path is to be sustainable in the medium and long terms, the domestic goals of each country must be met and their process improved, while at the same time countries need to shoulder their economic commitments. They must do more than assume commitments; they have to fulfil them, because their failure to do so would disincentivize environmental protection.
Lastly, I wish to raise one other point that I have also touched upon previously and on which there has been little positive change. I am convinced that it is not possible to fully enjoy freedom in the international community if there is no freedom of trade. Protectionism has hindered the development of our peoples and led to a vicious cycle in which isolation is stimulated by the erection of barriers. We have to aim for a world that is more open to other countries, goods and services. That in no way means neglecting the domestic economy. It is possible to have open trade policies that also stimulate the domestic economy. We have to build a more open world if we really believe in the equality of opportunities. If we fail to do so, it is clear that we will not be able to generate wealth, jobs and, ultimately, prosperity.
I wish to reiterate today a concept that I have mentioned in one of my previous statements to the Assembly. We are all one. At the time, I was referring to the lessons of the pandemic. Some people have yet to learn that lesson. Ultimately, this is an affirmation of common sense, and I believe that it should also be a compass for us in our daily exercise of power, both domestically and in our bilateral and multilateral relations. I am convinced that we will progress much more quickly and much more united if we learn that lesson.
