Today is the fourth time that I have had the great honour of speaking to the Assembly as President of the United States. It will be my last. I have seen a remarkable sweep of history. I was first elected to office as a United States Senator in 1972. Now, while I know I look like I am only 40, I was 29 years old at the time. Back then, we were living through an inflection point, a moment of tension and uncertainty. The world was divided by the Cold War. The Middle East was headed towards war. America was at war in Viet Nam — at that point, the longest war in America’s history. Our country was divided and angry, and there were questions about our staying power and our future. But even then I entered public life not out of despair but out of optimism.
The United States and the world got through that moment. It was not easy or simple or without significant setbacks. But we went on to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons through arms control and then to bring the Cold War itself to an end. Israel and Egypt went to war but then forged an historic peace. We ended the war in Viet Nam. Last year in Hanoi, I met with the Vietnamese leadership, and we elevated our partnership to the highest level. It is a testament to the resilience of the human spirit and its capacity for reconciliation that today the United States and Viet Nam are partners and friends. It is proof that even from the horrors of war there is a way forward. Things can get better.
We should never forget that. I have seen it throughout my career. In the 1980s I spoke out against apartheid in South Africa, and then I watched the racist regime fall. In the 1990s I worked to hold Milošević accountable for war crimes, and he was indeed held accountable. At home, I wrote and passed the Violence Against Women Act to end the scourge of violence against women and girls not only in America but across the world — as many leaders here today have as well, even if we have so much more to do, especially with regard to combating the use of rape and sexual violence as weapons of war and terror. We were attacked on 11 September 2001 by Al-Qaida and Osama bin Laden. We brought him to justice.
I then worked for the presidency in another moment of crisis and uncertainty. I believed that America had to look forward. New challenges, new threats and new opportunities were in front of us. We needed to put ourselves in a position to see the threats, deal with the challenges and seize the opportunities. We needed to end the era of war that began on 9/11. As Vice-President to President Obama, I was asked to wind down the military operations in Iraq. And we did, painful as it was.
When I took office as President, Afghanistan had replaced Viet Nam as America’s longest war. I was determined to end it, and I did. It was a hard decision, but the right one. Four American presidents had faced that decision, but I was determined not to leave it to the fifth. It was accompanied by tragedy, as 13 brave Americans lost their lives along with hundreds of Afghans in a suicide bombing. I think of those lost lives every day. I think of all the 2,461 United States military deaths over the 20 long years of that war. A total of 20,744 American servicemen were wounded in action. I think of their service, their sacrifice and their heroism. I know that other countries lost their own men and women who were fighting alongside us. We honour their sacrifices as well.
To face the future, I was also determined to rebuild my country’s alliances and partnerships to a level not previously seen. We did just that, through traditional treaty alliances as well as new partnerships such as the Quad arrangement between the United States, Japan, Australia and India.
I know that many people look at the world today and see difficulties and react with despair, but I do not. I will not. As leaders, we do not have that luxury. I recognize the challenges that we are facing from Ukraine to Gaza to the Sudan and beyond — war, hunger, terrorism, brutality, record displacements of people, a climate crisis, democracy at risk, strains within our societies, the promises and significant risks of artificial intelligence (AI). The list goes on. But maybe because of all that I have seen and all that we have done together over the decades, I have hope. I know there is a way forward. In 1919 the Irish poet William Butler Yeats described a world where “Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world”. Some may say that those words describe the world not just in 1919 but in 2024. But I see a crucial distinction. In our time, the centre has held. Leaders and people from every region and across the political spectrum have stood together. We have turned the page on the worst pandemic in a century. We made sure that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) no longer controls our lives. We defended the Charter of the United Nations and ensured the survival of Ukraine as a free nation. My country made the largest investment in climate and clean energy in history so far.
There will always be forces that pull our countries and the world apart — aggression, extremism, chaos, cynicism and a desire to retreat from the world and go it alone. Our task and our test is to make sure that the forces holding us together are stronger than those pulling us apart, that the principles of partnership that we come here each year to uphold can withstand the challenges and that the centre holds once again.
I truly believe that we are at another inflection point in world history, where the choices we make today will determine our future for decades to come. Will we stand behind the principles that unite us? Will we stand firm against aggression? Will we end the conflicts that are raging today? Will we take on global challenges such as climate change, hunger and disease? Will we plan now for the opportunities and risks presented by revolutionary new technologies?
I want to talk today about each of those decisions, and about the actions that in my view we must take. To start with, each of us in this body has made a commitment to the principles of the Charter and to standing up against aggression. When Russia invaded Ukraine, we could have stood by and merely protested. But Vice-President Harris and I understood that the war was an assault on everything that this Organization is supposed to stand for. And so at my direction, America stepped into the breach, providing massive security, economic and humanitarian assistance. Our NATO allies and our partners in more than 50 nations stood up as well. But most importantly, the Ukrainian people stood up. I ask everyone in this Hall to stand up for them.
The good news is that Putin’s war has failed in its core aim. He set out to destroy Ukraine, but Ukraine is still free. He set out to weaken NATO, and yet NATO is bigger, stronger and more united than ever before, with two new members, Finland and Sweden. But we cannot let up. The world now has another choice to make. Will we sustain our support to help Ukraine win this war and preserve its freedom or will we walk away and let aggression be renewed and a nation be destroyed? I know my answer. We cannot grow weary. We cannot look away. We will not let up in our support for Ukraine until Ukraine wins a just and durable peace based on the Charter.
We also need to uphold our principles as we seek to responsibly manage competition with China so that it does not veer into conflict. We stand ready to cooperate on urgent challenges for the good of our people and of peoples everywhere. We recently resumed cooperation with China to stop the flow of deadly synthetic narcotics. I appreciate that collaboration, which matters for the people of my country and for many others around the world.
In matters of conviction, the United States is unabashed, pushing back against unfair economic competition and the military coercion of other nations in the South China Sea, maintaining peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits and protecting our most advanced technologies so that they cannot be used against us or any of our partners. At the same time, we are going to continue to strengthen our network of alliances and partnerships across the Indo-Pacific. Those partnerships are not against any nation. They are building blocks for a free, open, secure and peaceful Indo-Pacific.
We are also working to bring a greater measure of peace and stability to the Middle East. The world must not flinch from the horrors of 7 October 2023. Any country would have the right and responsibility to ensure that such an attack could never happen again. Thousands of armed Hamas terrorists invaded a sovereign State, slaughtering and massacring more than 1,200 people, including 46 Americans, in their homes and at a music festival. There were despicable acts of sexual violence, and 250 innocents were taken hostage. I have met with the families of those hostages. I have grieved with them. They are going through hell. And innocent civilians in Gaza are also going through hell. Thousands and thousands have been killed, including aid workers. Too many families have been dislocated, crowded into tents and left to face a dire humanitarian situation. They did not ask for the war that Hamas started. With Qatar and Egypt, I have put forward a ceasefire and hostage deal, which has been endorsed by the Security Council. Now is the time for the parties to finalize the terms of the deal, bring the hostages home, achieve security for Israel and a Gaza free of Hamas’s grip, ease the suffering in Gaza and end the war.
Since 7 October we have also been determined to prevent a wider war from engulfing the entire region. Unprovoked, Hizbullah joined the 7 October attack by launching rockets into Israel. Almost a year later, too many on each side of the Israel-Lebanon border remain displaced. Full-scale war is not in anyone’s interest. Even as the situation has escalated, a diplomatic solution is still possible. In fact, it remains the only path to lasting security that will allow residents of both countries to return to their homes on the border safely. That is what we are working tirelessly to achieve. As we look ahead, we must also address the rise in violence against innocent Palestinians on the West Bank and set the conditions for a better future, including through a two-State solution, whereby Israel enjoys security, peace, full recognition and normalized relations with all its neighbours and Palestinians live in security, dignity and self-determination in a State of their own. Progress towards peace will put us in a stronger position to deal with the ongoing threat posed by Iran. Together we must deny oxygen to its terrorist proxies, which have called for more attacks like that of 7 October, and we must ensure that Iran can never, ever obtain a nuclear weapon.
Gaza is not the only conflict that deserves our outrage. In the Sudan, a bloody civil war has unleashed one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises, with 8 million people on the brink of famine, hundreds of thousands already there and atrocities being committed in Darfur and elsewhere. The United States has led the world in providing humanitarian aid to the Sudan. With our partners, we have led diplomatic talks to try to silence the guns and avert a wider famine. The world needs to stop arming the generals, speak with one voice and tell them to stop tearing their country apart. They must stop blocking aid to the Sudanese people and end this war now.
But people need more than the absence of war. They need a chance to live in dignity and to be protected from the ravages of climate change, hunger and disease. Our Administration has invested more than $150 billion to make progress towards those and other Sustainable Development Goals. That includes $20 billion for food security and more than $50 billion for global health. We have mobilized billions more in private-sector investment. We have taken the most ambitious climate actions in history, including moving to rejoin the Paris Climate Agreement on day one of my presidency. Today my country is finally on track to cut emissions in half by 2030 and to honour my pledge to quadruple climate financing to developing nations, with $11 billion provided so far this year. We rejoined the World Health Organization and donated nearly 700 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine to 117 countries. We must now move quickly to combat the mpox outbreak in Africa. We are prepared to commit $500 million to help African countries prevent and respond to mpox and to donate 1 million doses of mpox vaccine immediately. We call on our partners to match our pledge and make this a billion-dollar commitment to the people of Africa.
Beyond the core necessities of food and health, the United States, the Group of 7 and our partners have embarked on an ambitious initiative to mobilize and deliver significant financing to the developing world. Through the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment, we are working to help countries build their infrastructure, transition to clean energy, carry out digital transformations and lay new economic foundations for a prosperous future. We have already started to see the fruits of that effort emerge in Southern Africa, South-East Asia and the Americas. We must keep it going.
I want to get things done together. In order to do that, we must build a stronger, more effective and more inclusive United Nations. The United Nations needs to adapt to bring in new voices and new perspectives. That is why we support reforming and expanding the membership of the Security Council. My United Nations Ambassador just laid out our detailed vision, one that reflects the world of today, not of yesterday. It is time to move forward. The Security Council, like the United Nations itself, needs to get back to the job of making peace, brokering deals to end wars and suffering, stopping the spread of the most dangerous weapons and stabilizing troubled regions, from East Africa to Haiti, where a Kenya-led mission is working alongside the Haitian people to turn the tide.
We also have a responsibility to prepare our citizens for the future. I believe we will see more technological change in the next two to 10 years than we have in the past 50. Artificial intelligence is going to change our ways of life, work and war. It could usher in scientific progress at a pace never seen before and much of which could make our lives better. But AI also brings profound risks, from deep fakes to disinformation and from novel pathogens to bioweapons. We have worked at home and abroad to define new norms and standards. This year the General Assembly adopted its first-ever resolutions on artificial intelligence (resolutions 78/265 and 78/311), with a view to starting to develop global rules of the road. We also announced the Political Declaration on Responsible Military Use of Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy, endorsed by 60 of the countries represented in this Hall. But let us be honest. That is just the tip of the iceberg of what we need to do to manage this new technology. Nothing is certain about how AI will evolve or be deployed. No one knows all the answers.
It is therefore with humility that I pose two questions. First, how do we as an international community govern AI? As countries and companies race towards uncertain frontiers, we need an equally urgent effort to ensure AI’s safety, security and trustworthiness. And as AI grows more powerful, it also must grow more responsive to our collective needs and values. The benefits must be shared equitably with all. It should be harnessed to narrow digital divides rather than deepen them.
Secondly, will we ensure that AI supports rather than undermines the core principles that human life has value and that all humans deserve dignity? We must make certain that its awesome capabilities will be used to uplift and empower ordinary people, not to give dictators more powerful shackles for the human spirit. In the years ahead, there may well be no greater test of our leadership than how we deal with AI.
In conclusion, even as we navigate so much change, one thing must not change. We must never forget who we are here to represent. “We the People” are the first words of the United States Constitution, the very idea of America, and they inspired the opening words of the United Nations Charter. I have made the preservation of democracy the central cause of my presidency. This summer, I faced a decision about whether to seek a second term as President. It was a difficult decision, as being President has been the greatest honour of my life. There is so much more I want to get done. But as much as I love the job, I love my country more. After 50 years of public service, I decided that it was time for a new generation of leadership to take my nation forward.
Let us never forget that some things are more important than staying in power. It is our people who matter the most. We must never forget that we are here to serve the people, not the other way around. The future will be won by those who unleash their people’s full potential to breathe freely, to think freely, to innovate, to educate and to live and love openly without fear. That is the soul of democracy. It does not belong to any one country. I have seen it all around the world in the brave men and women who ended apartheid, brought down the Berlin Wall and fight today for freedom, justice and dignity. We saw that universal yearning for rights and freedom in Venezuela, where millions cast their vote for change. While that vote had not been recognized, it cannot be denied. The world knows the truth. We saw it in Uganda, where lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender activists are demanding safety and recognition of their common humanity. We see it in citizens across the world who are peacefully choosing their future. From Ghana to India to South Korea, nations representing one quarter of humankind will hold elections in this year alone.
The remarkable power of “We the People” makes me more optimistic about the future than I have been since I was first elected to the United States Senate in 1972. Every age faces its challenges. I saw that as a young man, and I see it today. But we are stronger than we think. We are stronger together than alone. What people call impossible is just an illusion. Nelson Mandela taught us that it always seems impossible until it is done. There is nothing that is beyond our capacity if we work together. Let us work together. God bless us all and protect all who seek peace.
