First of all, allow me to convey the greetings and best wishes for peace and prosperity of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, to the United Nations leadership, Heads of State and delegations participating in the seventy-ninth session of the General Assembly. Let me also express my sincere gratitude for this opportunity to address the General Assembly.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his firm focus on Central Asia. That was once again confirmed by his recent visit to our region, which laid a solid foundation for further expanding cooperation with the United Nations.
Our debates are taking place at a time of escalating global challenges. Wars and conflicts, a threefold planetary climate crisis, the worsening of the world economy and the technology gap are affecting all countries without exception. We firmly believe that the United Nations must remain central in addressing the challenges of the twenty-first century. Resolving global issues at the national level is crucial to maintaining stability and the well-being and prosperity of our people.
In that context, achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is very important. The consistent implementation of the SDGs has been identified by the President of our country as the cornerstone of Uzbekistan’s State policy. Our Uzbekistan 2030 development strategy is fully aligned with the SDGs. In recent years, Uzbekistan has made significant progress in poverty reduction, improving public access to education, transitioning to a green economy and promoting gender equality. Our gross domestic product has more than doubled and the poverty rate has fallen almost 4 times in less than 10 years. We are taking solid steps to create jobs and improve the quality of human capital with the aim of reducing the unemployment rate from 11 per cent to 7 per cent.
The full-scale implementation of the SDGs is impossible without attracting investments and advanced technologies. Uzbekistan is actively pursuing those goals, leveraging our State resources and private sector. However, many developing countries face challenges in accessing global financial resources. We share the aim of reforming the international financial system to establish a modern financial architecture.
Humankind’s future is closely linked to the development and application of modern technologies. New scientific advances should bring people and nations closer together, not separate them. We proceed from the principle that access to technology is not a privilege, but a right of every person and every nation. Digital technologies are especially crucial. We have adopted the Digital Uzbekistan 2030 Strategy. We are rapidly advancing our information technology sector.
Yet there is another side of the coin. The rise of digital technologies presents new challenges, particularly concerning the uncontrolled use of artificial intelligence. Based on that idea, at the previous session Uzbekistan supported and co-sponsored General Assembly resolutions on utilizing safe artificial intelligence for sustainable development and strengthening international cooperation. We will continue to advocate for broad international collaboration to address those issues.
Last year was one of the hottest in the history of meteorological observations. We witnessed record-breaking heat and extreme cold conditions worldwide. That once again proves the growing urgency of the climate change problem. Central Asia is among the most exposed and vulnerable regions of the world to climate change. The air temperature in Central Asia is rising faster than the global average. That creates a wide range of problems that pose serious risks to food and energy security. Thus, the level of water availability per capita in Central Asia has halved over the past few decades.
The Aral Sea disaster continues to have an extremely negative impact on the ecosystems of all States of the region. We call on the international donor community to expand projects in the Aral Sea region aimed at mitigating the devastating consequences of the disaster. The Aral Sea became the first region in the world to be granted the status of a Zone of Environmental Innovation and Technology by the United Nations. Our best experience could benefit other countries facing similar problems.
Central Asian countries are unified on climate action. Last December, at the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan, the General Assembly adopted by consensus resolution 78/147, “Central Asia facing environmental challenges: fostering regional solidarity for sustainable development and prosperity”. We have also developed a regional climate change adaptation strategy and established a Climate Council to create a national climate change programme. At the same time, we are aware of the need for broad international cooperation to effectively overcome those challenges. In that regard, we propose the adoption of a resolution designating an international year of land restoration and increasing drought resistance.
Our updated Constitution sets ambitious goals for building a welfare State. Uzbekistan is committed to enhancing social protection, improving service quality and implementing international standards. To that end, we have established the Social Protection Agency. We plan to hold a world conference on social protection in 2025 and invite all United Nations Member States to that important event.
Empowering women and girls is a key component of our State policy. Uzbekistan has made notable progress in ensuring gender equality, ranking among the top five countries in that regard. The Asian Women’s Forum, held in Samarkand in partnership with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, has become a crucial platform for dialogue on gender policy issues. We propose expanding that forum into a global women’s forum and adopting a resolution on enhancing the social, economic and political activities of Asian women.
Youth represents our common future. In Uzbekistan, where over half of the population is under 30, effective youth policy is vital to building a new Uzbekistan. We are a global leader in implementing Youth 2030: The United Nations Youth Strategy. However, the rising radicalization and increased violence involving young people are alarming. We must focus on fostering the proper spiritual and moral education of young people to prevent their involvement in radical movements. We propose enhanced cooperation in that direction, based on resolution 73/128, “Enlightenment and religious tolerance”, adopted at the initiative of our President in 2018.
The global threat of terrorism requires unified international action. In the fight against that evil, there should be no place for selective approaches and double standards. The Central Asian States maintain close cooperation in ensuring regional security. Together with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, we have successfully launched the Regional Expert Council on Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Returnees from Conflict Zones. We appreciate the United Nations assistance in developing Uzbekistan’s National Strategy to Fight Drug Addiction and Drug Crimes for 2024−2028.
As a State party to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, Uzbekistan welcomes anti-corruption efforts. We support enhancing the role of the United Nations in fostering international cooperation against corruption. In December last year, together with the State of Qatar and with the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, we hosted the high-level International Anti-Corruption Excellence Award ceremony in Tashkent.
In recent years, our country has become an active participant in all United Nations processes. For the first time in our history, we have joined the United Nations Human Rights Committee, the Economic and Social Council and the Governing Body of the International Labour Organization. In 2025, we will host the forty-third session of the UNESCO General Conference in Samarkand, an event that will be held outside of Paris for the first time since 1985. We invite all UNESCO member States to actively participate in that event. We have decided to run for non-permanent membership of the Security Council for the 2035-2036 term. We count on Members’ support for our candidacy.
Central Asia remains a top priority of Uzbekistan’s foreign policy. The new political atmosphere in Central Asia has allowed us to address many global issues regionally. We will continue to consolidate our efforts to transform the region into a zone of lasting peace, good-neighbourliness, stability and dynamic development.
Our region remains one of the least integrated economies in the world in terms of its transport and communication networks. Due to the geographical location of Central Asia, the cost of transporting goods to the nearest seaports can reach up to 50 per cent of their final value, which is four to five times higher than the global average. Today, our region is firmly focused on connecting to major global markets and revitalizing the Great Silk Road. Uzbekistan is taking strong steps to establish effective transport corridors leading to international markets. We are implementing an ambitious project to build the Trans-Afghan railway, which will provide access to global ports and have a positive effect on the economic development of our vast region.
The key to ensuring stability and sustainable development in our region lies in addressing the Afghan problem. Afghanistan is an integral part of Central Asia. Unfortunately, the international community has been unable to implement measures capable of reversing the challenging situation in that country. Uzbekistan is pursuing a pragmatic policy towards Afghanistan. We will continue to contribute to Afghanistan’s economic reconstruction and the development of its transport and energy infrastructure. We are ready to expand the educational centre for Afghan citizens in the Uzbek city of Termez into a global training centre. Recently, we have established the Termez International Trade Centre, designed to foster a favourable business environment and enhance logistics. In order to achieve stability, it is crucial to uphold the United Nations central role in resolving the Afghan issue and developing coordinated strategies to ensure sustainable development.
In conclusion, I would like to once again emphasize that the challenges and threats we face today can be addressed only through comprehensive international efforts. Uzbekistan remains committed to actively participating in shaping the agenda for multilateral cooperation, achieving common goals and supporting measures to reinforce the central role of the United Nations.
