Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a magnificent exemplar of our Caribbean civilization. Despite a quarter century of analysis, advocacy and prescriptions set forth by the leaders of small island developing States (SIDS) and international institutions charged with advancing the interest of SIDS, our travails are enduring in a global community largely uninterested in our well-being and that of small States generally. We in SIDS remain unequally yoked in a global community motivated by the baser instincts of the untrammelled power of money, ideology, guns, lethal weaponry and territorial and global dominance.
To be sure, the SIDS have made incremental advances in the global community and in the architecture of international relations. Nevertheless, for us in SIDS it has been a situation akin to going up a down escalator in which the down escalator is moving at a faster pace than the upward baby steps. Frequently, it appears as though many of the powerful would wish that SIDS did not exist, but here we are, stubborn as the heavens. We are not going anywhere, despite our massive vulnerabilities. Our people have a permanence in this world even if some of our lands wash away. We have a voice and we will continue to use it.
We demand as of right especial support from the international community to address efficaciously the unique social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities of SIDS in the interest of the nearly 70 million people who permanently occupy the seascape and landscape of SIDS and in the interest, too, of all the other 8 billion or so persons who inhabit Mother Earth. Small island exceptionalism ought to be a category embedded formally in international law and accorded most favourable treatment.
Rather than securing most favourable treatment, the SIDS are required to fight to maintain even the special considerations that providence or serendipity has bestowed upon them. A case in point is the current attempt by the International Development Association (IDA) to pit the most vulnerable — the SIDS — against the poorest countries in its quest to tighten the terms under which qualifying SIDS of a particular income level, such as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, obtain soft loans through the World Bank-IDA nexus. In any event, why is the World Bank persisting with the single, anachronistic and ill-designed metric of average per-capita income in respect of vulnerable SIDS in the age of the Anthropocene, as against a more comprehensive and sensible measure of a multidimensional vulnerability index?
The unvarnished truth is that the developed countries have not kept their promises to the SIDS, except the most marginal ones. Importantly, the countries of the developed world, the major historic and contemporary emitters of greenhouse gases, have failed and/or refused to keep their solemn commitments of restricting the global temperature at below 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. Unless there are drastic alterations in the patterns of consumption, production, life and living in developed and large emerging economies, our planet is inexorably on a path to the proverbial hell in a handbasket. In the process, countries of an island or seaboard civilization are likely to be inundated by raging seas and enveloped in searing heat.
On the matter of the financing of climate change, the developed countries, which have the means and the major historic responsibility to contain that existential threat, have been parsimonious and less than responsible in practice. Even today, the cynicism and double-speak of several major developed countries are breathtaking in response to the quest of most of the global community to transform the international financial institutions as fit-for-purpose in today’s world and for responsible, reasonable alterations in the actual modalities of climate change financing. High representatives of most of those developed countries pay lip-service in general to the innovative Bridgetown 3.0 proposals, endorsed by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), only to nit-pick and delay in the particulars of the progressive essentials. Brazenly, when those developed countries make a marginal concession, they trumpet it as a major advance so as to send the proverbial fool a little further.
The Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, adopted earlier this year, encompasses an action-oriented framework for the way forward. The Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), recently adopted by the General Assembly, provides a wider and promising buttress. In our advocacy for the 39 SIDS, we embrace, too, the cause of the least developed countries and the landlocked developing countries — all 92 vulnerable countries in the United Nations system.
Growing material dissatisfaction grips increasingly large numbers of people in both the metropoles and the hinterlands of this highly interconnected world. Noticeably, the ceremony of innocence is drowned, things are falling apart, the centres cannot hold and the cascading effects are ripping the world asunder; the best lack all conviction and the worst are full of passionate intensity. Creative resistance and reconstruction are the banners under which ordinary men and women across the globe are draping themselves. Sadly, in the North Atlantic countries there is growing and dangerous constituency for an illiberal, even neo-fascist option of looking forward to an illusory past in search of making their countries again unalloyed, mythical paradises of unrivalled dominance. They are looking forward to a past that never was.
At the same time, even a modest, middling social democracy is on the retreat because that old political shell of the post-1945 global order can barely contain the erupting contradictions within and outside it. A search for new modalities is emerging but not yet fully formed, in part because the old order is unprepared to relinquish, cede or share power even as it realizes that it cannot continue to rule in the old way, but the new is yet to be born and the forces of change lack a sufficiency of strength to deliver satisfactory alterations.
The war in Ukraine, the genocide in Gaza, the conflicts in Yemen, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the threats across the Taiwan Strait, an empire’s designs on revolutionary Cuba and Venezuela, the violence and more in Haiti, and suchlike disruptions of the peace globally all have specific origins and contexts. But they are all reflective, too, of a failure of multilateralism, a hamstrung United Nations framework and a derogation from the fundamental precepts of the Charter of the United Nations. Large, powerful nations, singly or in allied combinations, have a propensity to seek dominance. In that milieu, opportunistic or servile alliances emerge or persist as the particular circumstances admit. It all degenerates into a Manichaean politics of the madhouse. Hypocrisy, disinformation and folly reign supreme.
In that context arises the trope of the neoliberal global order that the principal contradiction in today’s global political economy is between democracy and autocracy. Still, all the self-serving shibboleths and gloss of that fictional construct will not wash away the unrepentant sins of the past or the cruel impositions of the present. The blinding truth is that the central contradiction in today’s political economy is not between democracy and autocracy. The main contradiction has been and still is today that which revolves around the fundamental material questions of who gets what, when, where and how. It is centrally about the struggle or competition for the ownership, control and distribution of material resources that constitute the basis for regional or global hegemony. Everywhere, more and more, the poor, the hungry, the marginalized and the disadvantaged are clamouring, and organizing for a different and better future — not an unacceptable past, not a present without possibilities for upliftment, but a future beyond unbounded elements.
Sadly, in our region we have been experiencing the lived reality that the imperial ghost of Monroe still stalks the marbled halls of the citadels of a neighbouring great country of extraordinary possibilities, to the detriment of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. No country in our hemisphere can reasonably be considered a security or other kind of threat to that great nation, yet Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and other Caribbean countries have been damaged, collaterally and directly, in significant material ways by the weaponizing of the financial system and the unjust, unilateral, coercive sanctions against Venezuela and Cuba, which are a breach of international law. I am pleading with our friends for an amicable reset of those troubled relations in the interest of peace, mutual respect, justice and prosperity. The international community continues, overwhelmingly and rightly, to demand the end of the unilateral sanctions, embargos and unfair declarations about State sponsorship of terrorism, and more, made against Cuba.
On 1 July, the Category 4 Hurricane Beryl battered Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Grenada and Jamaica. Since the dawn of the twenty-first century, it was the twelfth significant natural disaster to have struck my country. Hurricane Beryl has adversely affected one-fifth of our population and caused economic damage amounting to one-third of our country’s gross domestic product. The relief, recovery and reconstruction processes are under way. On behalf of the Government and the people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, I thank all countries and organizations, including the United Nations, that have come to our aid in the immediate aftermath of the hurricane.
Unfortunately, in the recovery and rebuilding processes we are essentially on our own. We have had to seek significant loans to rebuild our physical infrastructure and 5,000 houses, to provide income support for affected persons and to mobilize production support for the agricultural, fishing and tourism industries. I am appealing to the international community, our dear friends, to assist us not with further burdensome loans, but with requisite grants. The recovery and reconstruction after every natural disaster increase sharply our debt burden; countries like ours have contributed little or nothing to global warming and human-made climate change, yet we suffer largely alone on the front lines. That cannot be fair; it cannot be just. Do we have to choose between death or debt? Which do we have to choose?
The Caribbean Community, the African Union, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, their diasporas and all fair-minded persons globally have been insisting that the European nations responsible for native genocide and the enslavement of African bodies pay reparations for the consequential legacy of underdevelopment. That issue of transformative reparatory justice will not go away until it is appropriately addressed.
The suffering and pain of the Haitian people continue to weigh heavily on the consciences of our Caribbean. Through the efforts of the Haitian people, in tandem with the regional and international communities — especially CARICOM, the United States of America, Canada and Kenya — a measure of progress has been made on some fronts, but immense challenges remain in the humanitarian, security, political and economic spheres. The building of a free, democratic, peaceful and prosperous Haiti demands commitment and concerted action from all relevant stakeholders in pursuance of solutions devised by Haitians and led by Haitians. Haiti fatigue is not an option for the international community.
In our Caribbean there is a growing challenge of violent crime involving the combustible mix of imported guns and bullets, illegally exported marijuana and the trafficking of cocaine from South America. It is evident that the challenge demands much closer operational cooperation among all the countries concerned in the Caribbean, North America, South America and Europe.
In the Middle East, the collective punishment meted out against the Palestinians in Gaza and the continued illegal occupation of Palestinian lands, including in the West Bank, amidst accompanying State terror perpetrated by the Israeli regime in total defiance of international law, is utterly unacceptable. Surely, despite the complexities of the problems at hand, the United Nations, especially the Security Council, ought to summon the courage and the will to stop the carnage and facilitate a lasting peace and security.
In the far East, the prospect of a disruption of the tenuous peace across the Taiwan Strait is alarming. The quest for hegemony and the denial of a people’s inalienable right to self-determination are as wrong in the East as they are in the West, bullying is as objectionable in the West as it is in the East, and unilateral coercive action by a big Power in the East is as contrary to international law as it is surely in the West. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to urge that Taiwan be allowed to participate fully in the specialized agencies of the United Nations, including those pertaining to health, air and sea transport, climate change, disaster preparedness and global policy.
It appears that there have recently been some positive movements in the long quest to effect a judicious and just reform of the Security Council. It is evident to all reasonable persons that reform of that organ is long overdue. As the Chair of the L.69 group, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will continue its advocacy for an inclusive, more accountable, effective, representative and relevant Security Council.
We know that a better world is possible. On the United Nations rest our hopes for a better world of peace, justice, security and prosperity. Let us all act in accord with our responsibilities, obligations and means. Let us not desecrate our future.
