Over the past few days, we have heard two narratives in the General Assembly. One is the discourse of the oligarchs and their satellites, who seek to rule the world, and the other is that of the dignified peoples who are fighting for their sovereignty and independence.
The oligarchs, led by the Government of the United States of America, are attacking the Charter of the United Nations to destroy the Organization from both outside and within and have nearly achieved that already. To that end, they promote the involvement of private corporations, non-governmental organizations and other strategies that disregard the sovereignty of States. They have called this a rules-based order.
Not satisfied with that, the oligarchies resort to political expressions that we thought we had already overcome, such as fascism and Nazism. Those political currents of imposition and domination promote white supremacism, racism, xenophobia and other manifestations, normalized with the support of large international media monopolies and social networks that are at the service of imperialism and neocolonialism, ultimately supporting their plans to create tensions, fabricate conflicts and confront peoples.
As we speak in the Assembly, bombs are being dropped on Gaza, where Israel has murdered tens of thousands of innocent girls, boys, women and men, with the complicity of the Governments of the United States of America and the European Union. The greatest crime of extermination and genocide since that committed by Hitler in the Second World War is being perpetrated right now. Today, they intend to export their hatred and destruction to an entire region, bombing and murdering innocent people in Lebanon and Syria as they try to destabilize the Islamic Republic of Iran. That is a real threat to both humankind and world peace.
A new form of terrorism has been applied to Lebanon, with the complicity of private companies that manage the supply chains of mass consumer technologies. It has set a grim precedent, putting global security at risk. They also bomb civilian infrastructure in that brotherly country, killing innocent people just as they do in Gaza. Israel has truly become a death machine that must be stopped immediately.
However, instead of stopping the massacre and bringing those responsible to justice, the most powerful insist on expanding the war to Europe and other parts of the world through military blocs such as NATO. After the defeat of Ukraine in its Nazi adventure, they now intend to bring war and terrorism to great Russia, which, as history has taught us, will always be victorious. NATO’s expansion also threatens peace in South America through the installation of military bases, with the complicity of the lackey Governments of Argentina and Ecuador.
Hate speech stimulates and promotes terrorism in its various manifestations. For instance, from the territory of the United States of America itself, attacks, assassination attempts, destabilization and aggression against sovereign peoples, such as Venezuela, are tirelessly planned. To that end, they have resorted to the use of information and communication technologies, especially social networks, controlled by the empire’s front men, who fabricate psychological wars aimed at exploiting feelings of hatred and destruction, without control of any sort. In addition, cyberattacks are launched against critical infrastructure, including vital utilities and banking, oil and electoral systems, as happened in my country on 28 July.
How can progress be achieved on the issues of peace and security when the United States of America, whose Government insists on providing a framework of impunity for violators of international law, hijacks the body responsible for maintaining peace and security? From this rostrum, we reiterate our unwavering solidarity with the brotherly Palestinian people, whom we support with determination in their just cause and in all efforts aimed at preserving a clear political prospect that preserves the viability of the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders. We welcome the fact that, for the first time in the history of the Assembly, the delegation of Palestine sits alongside us as another State. Today more than ever, it is urgent that we ensure its immediate full membership of the Organization. We also ask how the decolonization agenda can be concluded if we insist on preserving a status quo that benefits only the occupying and administering Powers.
Our solidarity and strong support go out to all peoples who are fighting for their inalienable right to self-determination, to achieve full independence and to be true masters of their own destinies, their lands and their resources. It is time that the yearnings for freedom of our sisters and brothers in Western Sahara, Puerto Rico, New Caledonia, French Polynesia, Bonaire and so many other territories be finally realized.
Venezuela has a profound anti-colonial vocation, inherited from our independence struggle and the legacy of our liberator, Simon Bolívar. Therefore, we resolutely embrace all those great causes, which we have historically assumed as our own. We are determined to contribute to the end of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.
Similarly, we will continue to demand the restitution of sovereignty rights over the Chagos archipelago and the Malvinas islands to their legitimate owners, the Republic of Mauritius and the Argentine Republic. Despite the ineffable Javier Milei’s betrayal of the Malvinas cause, the brotherly people of Argentina can always count on Venezuela’s solidarity and full support in that just and historical claim.
Even today, the peoples of the world are still paying the price for the misfortunes left by the colonialism of empires such as the United Kingdom, which committed crimes on all continents and is now trying to erase them from our memories with total impunity. One such crime, the harmful effects of which persist to this day, is the dispossession of Venezuela’s sovereign rights over our Guayana Esequiba. That plunder originated in the expansionist and violent policy exercised by the British empire on Venezuelan territory throughout the nineteenth century, which sought to impose itself by fraudulent means in 1899 through an arbitration that was rigged by the Powers of the time.
On 3 December 2023, the Venezuelan people expressed themselves clearly and decisively in a consultative referendum, granting an ineluctable mandate to the Venezuelan State to recover Guayana Esequiba, a territory that represents a sacred inheritance of the struggle of our liberators. In that referendum, the Venezuelan people ratified the historic position of our country of never recognizing the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice in this case or any decision it may adopt on the matter.
The President of Guyana has lied from this rostrum on that issue. Venezuela recognizes the Geneva Agreement of 1966 as the only way to reach a settlement that restores Venezuela’s rights over the territory of Guayana Esequiba. Today, the United States of America and Guyana are in violation of the Joint Declaration of Argyle, threatening regional peace, security and stability through the military presence of extraregional actors and the illegitimate granting of oil concessions in an undemarcated maritime area. In that context, we take this opportunity to reiterate our firm commitment to the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace. It is time for Guyana to demonstrate its commitment to the Proclamation, dialogue, mutual respect, tolerance and understanding and to return to the Geneva Agreement of 1966.
The illegal imposition of unilateral coercive measures against entire peoples by the United States of America and the European Union represents a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations and every norm of international law. Such measures constitute massive violations of human rights, including the right to development, as well as crimes against humanity. We reiterate our call for the complete, immediate and unconditional lifting of all regimes of so-called sanctions and blockades that today are enforced against more than a third of humankind, including 30 million Venezuelans. We offer our solidarity with our sisters and brothers in Belarus, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Cuba, Eritrea, Iran, Nicaragua, Zimbabwe and so many others that suffer the effects of those criminal policies on a daily basis.
Dignified peoples fighting for their sovereignty and independence have also raised their voices in these spaces and must be heard. Venezuela today faces the onslaught of new forms of colonialism. For several years now, the Government in Washington, D.C., has been carrying out a neocolonial experiment aimed at destroying our democratic system, our institutions, our sovereignty, our independence and the inalienable right of our people to self-determination in every possible way. That large-scale recolonization plan seeks to destroy our Republic through an ongoing coup d’état. All options for carrying out that plan have been and remain on the table.
A ferocious economic, commercial and financial blockade has been cruelly and inhumanely imposed upon us through almost 1,000 sanctions that have cost our nation more than $642 billion dollars over the past seven years alone. To that, we must add the losses of our State oil company, PDVSA, amounting to $232 billion, and the theft of 31 tons of gold deposited in the Bank of England and of other important assets owned by the Republic abroad, not to mention the theft by Argentina and the Dominican Republic of aircraft in the service of the Venezuelan State.
Venezuela is not the only victim of such interventionism, deeply rooted in the colonialist tradition of the Monroe Doctrine, which continues to stalk any expression of political independence in our continent, as in the case of brave Cuba and blessed and ever-free Nicaragua. They also promote coups d’état, as they did in Bolivia in 2019 and 2024, and, with the support of local oligarchies, they mercilessly attack the Government of President Gustavo Petro Urrego, in Colombia, and that of President Xiomara Castro Sarmiento of Honduras. We offer them, too, our firm support and unwavering solidarity.
On 28 July, as is customary in our revolutionary democracy, the Venezuelan people expressed themselves in a conscious, peaceful and massive manner to elect, with full guarantees, transparency and freedom, the Venezuelan Head of State and Government for the 2025-2031 term. President Nicolás Maduro Moros was re-elected with clear and overwhelming support. After that great popular victory, the oligarchy of my country resorted once again to flouting our laws and institutions, triggering criminal violence that left 27 dead, hundreds wounded and the destruction of public and private property. Using criminal gangs, they set up barricades, burned schools, hospitals and public institutions, and assassinated ordinary citizens for their political affiliations.
The mainstream media will report none of this; worse still, neither will the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who, despite having received all the information about those criminal acts and the responsible actions undertaken by the Venezuelan State, has preferred to turn the victims into perpetrators and the perpetrators into victims. Over the past two days, that fascist disinformation campaign against our country has been fed from this rostrum. Seeking to impose a false narrative, the Government of the United States of America and its satellite and servile Governments have dedicated themselves to lying, attacking and threatening our people from this place, which is a symbol of peace and understanding. But we have come here once again to present the truth about Venezuela and our people; today, we come to unmask all those phonies.
At the forefront of that gigantic operation we find, as usual, the Government of the United States of America and its agencies in the context of their failed policy of continued coups d’état against the Bolivarian Revolution of Venezuela, which began more than 25 years ago. From their territory, specifically from the state of Florida, they plan terrorist attacks against public officials and public facilities. They also use social networks with impunity and the full support of the White House to promote mercenary incursions, as happened in May 2020.
Although Washington denies involvement, this time they have been caught red-handed. Investigations into the latest aggression plots have shown that several United States and European mercenaries, including an active United States military officer specializing in terrorist and destabilization operations, were behind the post-electoral violence. Those criminals have confessed that they intended to assassinate President Nicolás Maduro Moros, the Executive Vice-President and several other senior Venezuelan State officials, and to attack critical infrastructure services, such as water and electricity. We inform members of the Assembly that all, including two people linked to Spain’s National Intelligence Centre, have been arrested. More than 400 rifles of various types, some of them produced for the exclusive use of the United States Armed Forces, have also been seized. In the coming weeks, our Government will present additional and much stronger evidence of what happened, which we are certain will shock the world.
An additional phase of that criminal plan of aggression has been launched in recent days through another group of mercenaries who opened a website in this country to raise funds to attack Venezuela and openly carry out assassinations. That initiative has the public backing of United States Government agencies, members of the United States Congress and senators. The hypocritical oligarchic narrative does not condemn such an aberration. In that context, it is worth noting the obligation of States to ensure that their territory is not used to finance, plan, facilitate or commit acts of destabilization through the use of mercenaries and terrorists. We demand that the United States Government comply with its international obligations in that regard.
We must also emphasize that those terrorist plots, planned for months, took place at the very same time as the negotiation and signing of agreements between Venezuela and the United States of America in Doha, in September last year, whereby we sought to move towards a phase of normalization of relations between the two nations. That is further proof that the empire’s word and supposed good will cannot be trusted.
The Venezuelan people demand the immediate fulfilment of all the commitments agreed in Doha to lift all unilateral coercive measures that illegally weigh on our country today, and we thank the Government of the State of Qatar for its good offices as facilitator of those negotiations. Furthermore, and this must be said, all of that is also taking place as the Government of the United States of America, which promotes and finances criminal actions around the world, has included Cuba, entirely without basis, on a spurious list of countries allegedly accused of sponsoring terrorism. We also demand an end to that attack against the homeland of Martí and Fidel, which further deepens the impact of the blockade.
The new aggression against Venezuela, which is still in full swing, will meet exactly the same fate as all previous ones — a resounding failure. Despite the psychological operations aimed at creating confusion, and despite Washington’s overt and covert operations within the framework of a so-called maximum pressure policy, social peace reigns in Venezuela today. The plans to generate violence have been defeated thanks to the determination of our people to defend their right to live in peace.
Moreover, Venezuela is today enjoying growth that has allowed it to insert itself strongly into the world economic dynamic, contributing its strengths to the production of energy, food and basic goods and services. That epic has been possible thanks to the resolve of the Venezuelan people and firm leadership that has managed to stand up to the blockade.
At this juncture, we call on the free and peace-loving peoples of the world to strengthen unity in the face of those who want to divide us in order to achieve their plans of neocolonial domination. The hour belongs to the global South. It is time for the longed-for new world order. It is time to consolidate the new multipolar and multicentric world of peace and economic prosperity, free of hegemonies. It is time to rescue the founding principles contained in the United Nations Charter and to honour the promise that the Organization is at the service of “We the peoples”, as stated in its Preamble.
Venezuela puts its Bolivarian diplomacy of peace at the service of humankind to advance in that direction, as demonstrated by its leadership at the head of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations. Those are the principles that constitute the narrative of free peoples, which are expressed in new forms of partnership based on the principles of solidarity and complementarity, such as the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa bloc and other hopeful horizons of the emerging new world order, in which our country continues to insert itself at an accelerated pace.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that we in Venezuela are still on our feet, battling hand-in-hand with our people, in permanent popular organization and mobilization, in the struggle to continue consolidating our independence. No matter who is at the head of the United States imperialism to speak from this rostrum in a year’s time, Members may rest assured that the clear and rebellious voice of the people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will continue to be raised in this forum under the firm leadership of President Nicolás Maduro Moros, as we stand determined to resist United States imperialism. With Bolívar we say, “God grants victory to constancy”.
