I would like to first congratulate His Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. I trust that this session will be a great success. I also commend His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, and His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, for their contributions and efforts in coordinating the United Nations endeavours to prevent wars, maintain peace and promote global development cooperation.
The world is undergoing transformative changes of historic significance. Although peace, cooperation and development remain the dominant trends, they are facing new and more serious challenges. Strategic competition among major Powers is becoming more widespread, fiercer and more confrontational. Political disputes, conflicts and the security environment are intensifying. The space for survival and development is narrowing. Risks of conflict, new hot spots, the arms race, tensions, confrontation and direct clashes are increasing. The rise of power politics and egoistic nationalism are challenging international law, eroding multilateral institutions and diminishing faith in global cooperation. The vicious cycle of conflict and violence is escalating in various regions, causing immense suffering to millions of innocent civilians.
The risk of a limited nuclear war, or even a third world war, has not been ruled out.
Non-traditional security challenges, such as climate change, extreme weather events, natural disasters, diseases, resource depletion and an aging population, are becoming increasingly severe, hindering our efforts for development. Poor countries are being left further behind with a widening development gap. Super Typhoon Yagi, which ravaged Viet Nam and other countries in the region, serves as a stark warning of the severe impact that natural disasters and climate change can have on sustainable development for all.
Global food production is sufficient to feed one and a half times the world’s population, yet famine is threatening more than 780 million people, and 2.4 billion people are enduring food insecurity. Defence expenditure reached a record $2.4 trillion in 2023, yet we struggled to pool $100 billion for climate action. With only a third of the time on the timeline to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) remaining, 80 per cent of the targets may not be met.
Global economic growth is facing difficulties. Decoupling and fragmentation, along with economic pressures and sanctions, are threatening rapid and sustainable development. The fourth industrial revolution offers opportunities for quantum progress, but it also poses security and safety challenges for society and individuals.
Those unprecedented challenges to peace, cooperation, sustainable development and human dignity are affecting this generation and the next. They compel us to unite, act and work together, upholding the role of international institutions, foremost among them the United Nations, and regional organizations, including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, to achieve the ultimate goal of ending war, abolishing all forms of oppression, exploitation, building peace and creating a better world to bring happiness to all humankind.
In that spirit, I would like to share Viet Nam’s vision for a more peaceful, stable, cooperative, prosperous and sustainable future for everyone.
First, as peace and stability are the foundation of a prosperous future, we must promote the observance of international law and the Charter of the United Nations by all States, particularly the major Powers. Each State must act responsibly, fulfil its commitments and abide by international law and the Charter of the United Nations, including fundamental principles such as the peaceful settlement of disputes, the non-use of force, sovereign equality, territorial integrity and respect for the political systems chosen by the people of each nation. States should also contribute to the common work of the international community in line with their capabilities. We must strengthen solidarity, sincerity and trust among nations, uphold dialogue, eliminate confrontation and firmly oppose unilateral embargoes and sanctions that contravene international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, we must ensure equitable development for every State, community and individual, recognizing the diverse economic, social and cultural conditions they may have. Every resource must be effectively unleashed, marshalled and utilized for development according to each country’s needs. We must prioritize resources where they are most needed for implementing the SDGs, paying particular attention to assisting developing and less-developed countries, especially through preferential loans, the transfer of advanced technologies, investment and trade facilitation, and debt relief for poor countries.
Thirdly, we should urgently create smart global governance frameworks with a long-term vision for science and technology, especially emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence. That will ensure we make progress and enjoy the benefits of those technologies, while actively preventing threats to peace, sustainable development and humankind. In that connection, I welcome the documents adopted at the Summit for the Future, especially the Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I). That will serve as a crucial basis for advancing global governance and international cooperation in those areas.
Fourthly, we should adopt innovative thinking to build a transformative future across all sectors, focusing on digital transformation, green transition and global governance transformation. Green transition and digital transformation are essential tools for countries, especially developing ones, to build resilience and self-reliance, enabling a timely and active prevention of and response to shocks, crises and potential disasters. We must also prioritize reforming multilateral mechanisms, especially the United Nations system and international financial and monetary institutions, to ensure better representation, equity and transparency. Enhancing capacity, effectiveness and future-readiness is essential for remaining relevant in our changing world.
Fifthly, we must place the human person at the centre in delivering on our visions. People should be the centre, goal and drivers of all policies and actions at all levels. Investment should focus on the holistic development of the youth, enriching their knowledge and culture, grounded in shared values and a sense of responsibility and contribution.
Viet Nam welcomes the General Assembly’s official decision (resolution ES-10/23) to grant additional rights and privileges of participation to the State of Palestine from this session onwards. Viet Nam reaffirms its solidarity with the State and people of Cuba and calls on the United States to lift embargoes and sanctions against Cuba and to remove Cuba from the list of State sponsors of terrorism. We must vigorously promote such actions, since they are practical ways to foster equitable development and happiness for all.
President Ho Chi Minh, a Vietnamese hero of national liberation and an eminent man of culture, once stressed, “Unity, unity, great unity; success, success, grand success”. Only through unity and cooperation, with trust and by thinking and acting as one, can we build a world of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations, ensuring no one is left behind.
In today’s rapidly changing world, each State plays a vital role in the grand orchestration of our era. Viet Nam is making every effort to move forward towards a future of peace, stability, prosperity and sustainability — not just for our own people but for all nations worldwide. That is Viet Nam’s vision, goal and strong commitment to the international community, today and tomorrow.
