I have the great honour to address the Assembly on behalf of the Government and the people of the Republic of Vanuatu.
I join previous speakers in extending my sincere congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. He can count on my delegation’s full support and cooperation as he steers the work of this organ.
Vanuatu welcomes the theme of this seventy-ninth session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, as it addresses the global challenges of our time.
Seventy-nine years after the establishment of the United Nations, our collective efforts to create a better world for our present and future generations are nothing short of disappointing. It is alarming to note that, after all these years, we continue to be plagued by multiple world crises that undermine the promise of the Charter of the United Nations and fail our peoples, the vulnerable in particular.
Vanuatu welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest report (A/79/1), which highlights the fact that we are falling significantly short of achieving our Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), prompting the need to fast track actions to scale up the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the SDGs.
The latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warns us that we are likely to pass a dangerous temperature threshold within the next 10 years. That is why Vanuatu has sought an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice requesting clarification of States’ legal obligations with respect to climate change, which has garnered unprecedented global attention. The written submissions of 95 States and organizations received by the Court in the context of those proceedings, arising from last year’s consensus resolution 77/276, demonstrate the critical importance of legal clarity on States’ climate obligations and responsibility. This is not about naming or shaming any particular nation; it seeks to highlight the existing rules of international law and their consequences for all nations, providing the foundation for real climate action and climate justice based on a shared understanding of responsibility and accountability.
I call on all United Nations Member States, especially other climate vulnerable nations, to take part in those historic hearings, which begin on 2 December. Their voices are crucial to ensuring that the Court fully grasps the implications of climate change for those most affected and will unite us in our shared commitment to justice and human rights as part of a more sustainable future.
Vanuatu’s economy fared well when we maintained our status as a least developed country (LDC). After we graduated, our structural challenges and vulnerabilities remained while increasing costs continued to soar. We reiterate the need for our development partners to support us in phasing out our LDC-specific support in a gradual and predictable manner.
Small island economies also continue to face multiple crises amid tightening financial conditions and rising borrowing costs. That has increased our debt distress risks and undermined our abilities to invest in recoveries. Vanuatu welcomes the outcome of the Summit of the Future calling for global concerted efforts to reform the global economic and financial architecture to make it fit for the challenges of this century. We call for sweeping reforms of the Bretton Woods institutions to restructure the international monetary and financial system to better reflect the evolving global realities and challenges, including the establishment of an international sovereign debt work-out mechanism to resolve current debt crises in developing countries, particularly the most vulnerable.
Vanuatu and other small island economies are struggling with the onslaught of climate-induced disasters, and while we continue to try to build resilience and adapt to climate change, we are moving backwards too often. Vanuatu loses over half of its gross domestic product each time a severe cyclone strikes. We have had five severe cyclones in the past three years. The latest Adaptation Fund report estimates a current adaptation finance gap of between $194 billion and $366 billion a year.
As a country on the front line of frequent and intensifying climate disasters, Vanuatu calls for a new financing goal that will accelerate the transition away from fossils, build resilience and realistically address loss and damage. In the light of initiatives to mitigate and adapt to climate change, Vanuatu also believes that it is of crucial importance to prevent the severest harms to our planet’s vital and climate-regulating ecosystems before they occur. That is why we have taken the formal step of proposing an independent crime of ecocide to the International Criminal Court. We thank delegations, in particular Fiji and Samoa, for their ongoing support and co-sponsorship of the proposal, and we recognize that there is broad and growing support for that initiative around the world.
Vanuatu and many Pacific island States have faced multiple correspondent banking withdrawals restricting financial inflows, including delay in the transfer of international development funds and humanitarian and disaster relief funds, as well as discouraging private sector investment, despite genuine efforts to improve and enforce national regulations on money-laundering and financing for terrorism. Safeguarding uninterrupted access to international financial services is essential for fast cross-border payments, including remittances and export revenues. We welcome the World Bank’s efforts earlier this month to help Pacific island countries address that issue, among others.
In 2019, Vanuatu presented its first voluntary national review, highlighting a very positive message of progress despite extreme vulnerability to climate-related disasters. The presentation of our second Voluntary National Review this year at the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development highlighted significant challenges in our pursuit to achieving sustainable development.
We continue to endure increasingly frequent and severe tropical cyclones, which were compounded by the impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and there is no clear trajectory or end in sight. Ever looming is the prospect of future disasters. The Government and the people of Vanuatu have had to continuously adapt and strengthen resilience mechanisms to mitigate the impacts of those persistent threats and disruptions.
Fulfilling the SDGs is not merely an aspiration but a necessity for us. The 2023 SDG Summit saw the adoption of a strong Political Declaration and launched a new phase of accelerated action to achieve the SDGs by 2030. In July, the convening of the High-Level Political Forum yet again served as a platform for follow up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with a view to galvanizing real transformational change to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. What is more, the recent convening of the Summit of the Future sought to rally collective support for delivering faster and smarter on the 2030 Agenda, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. It is my hope that the reforms highlighted in the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1) will rebuild trust again in the multilateral system. The Pact for the Future requires strong political will to drive transformative actions that will usher in a brighter future for all.
Financing is the fuel for development, yet at the very heart of our failure to make real progress in achieving the SDGs lies a lack of financing. Not only do we remain on the front lines of a climate emergency that threatens our overall sustainable development, but time and time again, given the lack of affordable alternatives, we are forced to incur unsustainable levels of debt to finance recovery from natural disasters.
The international financial architecture must be reformed to address the urgent challenges of today. Our varying needs must be imbedded into the global economic and financial system so that it is more inclusive, fair and responsive to all. That includes developing tailored support and solutions that also facilitate easier access to affordable, long-term finance and address the decline in correspondent banking relations. Likewise, there must be a stronger push to enhance the representation and meaningful participation of small island developing States (SIDS) in the global economic and financial institutions.
Vanuatu, like many of our Pacific neighbours, continues to face acute and existential health and development threats, including the burden of non-communicable diseases and malnutrition and threats from future pandemics. The coronavirus disease and severe tropical cyclones exposed Vanuatu’s fragile health infrastructure and the need to invest in a health system that can better respond to the needs of its people and to future pandemics that will be resilient to climate change and related natural disasters. We urge the World Health Organization and SIDS partners to work together to enhance access to sustainable financing to support our efforts to prevent and control non-communicable diseases and our efforts to build a health system fit for purpose.
Advancing the agenda of leaving no one behind in the context of the non-self-governing territories means that we must work constructively to complete the work of decolonization. Not long ago, the first people of New Caledonia expressed their discontent with the manner in which the third referendum for political independence from France was conducted. As a result, riots took place that led to several deaths and the stalling of economic activity. The right of first people to their lands, oceans and culture must be recognized and respected. I urged the first people of New Caledonia to work with France to address their political future. In the meantime, New Caledonia must remain on the decolonization list.
In a similar vein, we call for the right of the first people of West Papua over their customary land and culture must be respected and I urge them to work mutually with the Government of Indonesia to address their challenges and that greater autonomy be accorded to West Papua towards its greater participation in decision-making.
To achieve sustainable development, we need peace. Today some regions of the world are not able to enjoy sustainable development due to the inability of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. We call for the urgent reform of the Security Council in order to ensure that it is fit for purpose and able to meet the challenges of our time. We are deeply concerned over the great threat to international peace and security posed by the continued existence of nuclear weapons. Given the current heightened global geopolitical tensions, we call for a renewed and strengthened effort to resolve the ongoing impasse in achieving nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation in all its aspects. We further call for the respect of the United Nations Charter.
In today’s fractured and polarized world, we need to accelerate our efforts to work together and rebuild trust in the multilateral system, with the United Nations at its centre. The Summit of the Future has offered us hope, and now we need to move from rhetoric to real actions on the ground. We need peace for the advancement of sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations. We need action on finance as fuel for development.
