I extend my congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang of Cameroon on his assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session. The theme of his presidency is one that resonates with us as we strive to navigate a path towards a more peaceful, sustainable and resilient future for our peoples and the planet. He may be assured of Samoa’s support in the successful execution of his mandate.
The effects of climate change are being lived in real time. We are not even at the end of 2024, yet we have witnessed countries in all corners of the globe endure extreme weather events, from ferocious wildfires to devastating floods and scorching heatwaves. In July, we saw the earliest Category 5 hurricane, Beryl, hit the Caribbean with great ferocity, causing devastation even in parts of Mexico, Venezuela and the United States.
Our collective efforts must not end at national borders. In our most difficult times, it is easy to abandon the collective to safeguard the individual, but history reminds us of the folly of that approach. Climate change remains one of the gravest concerns for all countries, especially the small island developing States (SIDS). Its impacts are felt more extensively due to our special circumstances and lack of capacity to respond quickly and effectively. Unless substantial investments are made to mitigate climate change, boost adaptation and build more resilient economies, we face urgent climate and financial risks.
Climate change also has significant security implications for our food, water and energy supplies, competition over natural resources, loss of livelihoods, climate-related disasters and potentially forced migration. We must do more to turn the tide, to honour our commitments and obligations and to take urgent and ambitious climate action now. Our expectations for the upcoming twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP29), in Azerbaijan, include securing an agreement on a new collective quantified goal on climate finance that is truly fit for purpose. It is time to review the outcomes of the first global stocktake to ensure that new nationally determined contributions due in 2025 are as ambitious as possible.
We must keep global temperatures below 1.5°C. That is a red line for many SIDS like my country, Samoa. In this era of unprecedented sea level rise, international law must evolve to meet the climate crisis and the disproportionate effect it has on SIDs. Earlier this week, the leaders of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) adopted the Declaration on Sea Level Rise and Statehood. The Declaration provides affirmation that international law is based on the fundamental principle of the continuity of States. Our statehood and sovereignty cannot be challenged. No matter the physical changes wrought by the climate crisis, we will remain sovereign States unless we choose otherwise.
As part of the blue Pacific continent, Samoa is committed to ensuring that our ocean spaces, resources and ecosystems remain healthy for current and future generations. We have witnessed many demands on our marine resources from a variety of sectors. Cognizant of the threats that such demands and pressures place on those critical resources, in 2020 we launched the Samoa Ocean Strategy, our national policy framework that seeks to sustainably manage Samoa’s vast ocean and marine resources. The Strategy provides bold and comprehensive integrated ocean management solutions to advance ocean stewardship and ensure that the cultural and economic values that Samoans derive from the ocean continue to be available to all generations.
Stewardship of the ocean extends beyond our national boundaries. In that regard, Samoa is working towards ratification of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, while continuing to engage regionally and internationally on advocacy of ocean health and the sustainability of our marine ecosystems, including fisheries resources. We call on our partners to continue working with us to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, which deprives us of resource benefits and undermines our management efforts. We continue to engage in the work of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee on Plastic Pollution for an international legally binding instrument on plastic pollution. For Samoa, the need to address the global plastic pollution problem, especially in the marine environment, is a priority.
We need to protect our biodiversity, both terrestrial and marine. Healthy biological diversity maintains the web of life that we rely on, such as food, water, medicine, economic growth and sustainable livelihoods. The protection of our mangroves and reef systems increases our resilience to climate change-driven erosion and flooding, supporting healthy ecosystems and the sustainable well-being of coastal communities.
Our experience with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has taught us to be better prepared for global pandemics. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are a priority concern and account for much of the burden of diseases in Samoa. Chronic NCDs are overtaking communicable diseases as the dominant health problem and are the leading causes of mortality, morbidity and disability. At the national level, NCDs account for almost half of the deaths and premature deaths in Samoa.
Food security is a priority that requires the transformation of our food systems. We must return to locally produced, quality fresh foods with less reliance on processed imported foods. Just as important is the need to address the balance of issues of access, affordability and convenience against quality and well-being.
In May, we met in Antigua and Barbuda for the fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States, where we adopted the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, a 10-year action plan for our sustainable development. SIDS are in the crossfire of multiple crises, including climate change and the economic and social repercussions of COVID-19, which many of us still have not fully recovered from. We face a unique set of vulnerabilities that impede our ability to achieve sustainable development. Most SIDS, like Samoa, face high indebtedness, compounded every time there is a natural disaster. Those disasters will only increase and intensify as long as climate change remains unaddressed. The work of the Systematic Observations Financing Facility and the Risk-informed Early Action Partnership in that space is much appreciated and fully supported by SIDS.
Samoa looks forward to the timely and effective implementation of the multidimensional vulnerability index by the international financial institutions and our development partners as a tool to assist SIDS in accessing finance. I am determined in that call, not only as Prime Minister of my country but as Chair of AOSIS. In July, Samoa presented its third voluntary national review report to the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development. Its focus is on the continued commitment of the Government to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at a pace commensurate with our prioritization, resource availability and the active engagement of our communities. Samoa continues to place emphasis on achieving the Sustainable Development Goals through a balancing of the strengths of our culture and society, transformative reforms, effective resource mobilization and the careful management of our natural environment.
The Global Digital Compact (resolution 79/1, annex I) was a focus of this year’s Summit of the Future, aimed at establishing a comprehensive framework for the governance of digital technologies and the Internet. We request that support for SIDS include capacity-building, technical assistance and the strengthening of digital infrastructure through cybersecurity measures and educational initiatives for public and private enterprises. The successful implementation of the Digital Compact will require a coordinated and multifaceted approach, with the assistance of United Nations entities and development partners in applying the principles to our national context, as well as at the regional and global levels.
Samoa remains a peaceful country, committed to justice and the protection of human rights. We are concerned that the war in Ukraine and the conflict in Gaza and surrounding areas are still ongoing, with no resolution in sight. The terrible loss of civilian lives, the displacement of people and the destruction of infrastructure and the environment are something we do not condone. The provision of arms to those conflicts needs to cease. Arms and weapons only fuel more death and destruction.
The United Nations can play a greater role in finding a path towards peace and we are committed to the collective responsibility of the global community to achieve that through international cooperation and diplomacy. Next year, the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations, will present an opportunity for all of us to seriously consider reforms of the Security Council. We must consider the expansion of both the permanent and non-permanent seats of the Security Council to enhance the representation of the underrepresented and unrepresented regions.
The more things change, the more we cannot afford to stay the same. The tools of a bygone era can no longer ensure our future. The complexity of the challenges that beset us requires a greater understanding of the challenges themselves, as well as of those being challenged. Samoa remains committed to the United Nations and our conviction that it remains the foremost forum to address all international issues.
