It is a good omen that I am addressing the General Assembly today as we celebrate a glorious national occasion for the Yemeni people. Sixty-two years ago, on 26 September 1962, our people made history by overthrowing the racist Imamate regime and declaring the Republic. This is an occasion for me to reiterate my congratulations to the Yemeni people everywhere and to express my pride and appreciation for the courage of those young men and women and opinion leaders who every year on this glorious day challenge the Houthi oppression machine supported by the Iranian regime.
The Yemeni Government remains committed to comprehensive and just peace in line with national, regional and international references, but it is necessary in the meantime to strengthen its position to confront any other options in light of the continued escalation by the Houthi militias at the local and regional levels and their threat to international navigation. To prevent the expansion and prolongation of that escalation, there is an urgent need for a collective approach to support the Yemeni Government and enhance its institutional capabilities to protect its territorial waters and secure its entire national territory.
If we fail to address those needs and to implement relevant international legitimacy resolutions that prohibit the flow of Iranian weapons and stem the sources of funding, the militias will not engage in any effort to achieve comprehensive and just peace or refrain from blackmailing the regional and international communities. History teaches us that leniency with the enemies of peace leads to the most heinous, costly and complex wars.
Despite the truce agreed by the Government of Yemen in April 2022, the militias have pursued their military violations and gross violations of human rights and national and international laws. In October 2022, the Houthi militias bombed oil export ports in Hadhramaut and Shabwa governorates, depriving the Yemeni people of the revenues needed to pay salaries and basic services, exacerbating humanitarian suffering and leading to an unprecedented devaluation of the national currency.
Recently, the Government suspended its decisions to relocate bank headquarters from Sana’a, which is under the control of the militias, to the interim capital, Aden, in response to the request of the United Nations and the international community to de-escalate, provided that the Houthis engage in serious talks to address the economic crisis and revive peace efforts in line with the road map mediated by our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman.
However, the militias responded by hijacking three Yemenia Airways planes, attacking the FSO Safer oil facility in Ma’rib governorate with drones and issuing racist laws and regulations to nominate specific categories of their affiliates to public office, most notably in the judiciary, indicating that they intend to take further repressive measures against public freedoms and civil work. The ongoing pattern of reckless escalation in response to de-escalation initiatives requires the international community to adopt firm policies to push the militias towards the option of peace in accordance with international resolutions, especially Security Council resolution 2216 (2015), instead of their senseless escalation.
Almost four months have passed since the terrorist Houthi militias arrested dozens of United Nations employees, adding them to the thousands of innocent women, children, young people and elderly who have disappeared into its prisons over the years, most notably the activist Mohammed Qahtan, who is covered by the Security Council resolution. There is a widespread belief that the United Nations is responsible for allowing the militias to kidnap that unprecedented number of relief workers, non-governmental organization staff, activists and civil society leaders, due to its failure to respond to the Yemeni Government’s request to move its headquarters from Sana’a to the temporary capital, Aden. By not taking the militia threat seriously and by maintaining its headquarters in Sana’a, the United Nations inadvertently enabled those terrorists to take its staff and assets hostage and to use them as bargaining chips to blackmail the international community and extract negotiating concessions that are unacceptable under any circumstances. The continuation of that situation cannot be defended or justified, because the presence of the United Nations headquarters in Sana’a emboldens the militias, which are designated on the terrorist list, and endangers relief workers and human rights defenders. It is therefore necessary to reconsider those policies and arrangements immediately.
Through their ongoing terrorist attacks on global trade in the Red Sea and surrounding waterways, the Houthi militias have proven that they pose an increasing threat not only to Yemeni, as some believed a decade ago, but also to the stability of the entire region and the safe flow of international trade, valued at more than a trillion dollars. Today they are strengthening their position as the first rebel group in history to use ballistic missiles and drones against civilian commercial ships.
Late last month, Houthi militias hit the tanker MV Sounion, carrying about a million barrels of crude oil, causing fires that threatened one of the largest oil spills in history before the ship was barely saved by the international coalition. That is not the first incident caused by the militias, as they have previously boasted of sinking two other ships and have for years obstructed efforts to unload the decaying FSO Safer, which was carrying a similar amount of crude oil, confirming that their terrorist acts will remain a permanent threat to maritime security.
The Yemeni economy has faced complex challenges for years, but the Houthi terrorist attacks on oil facilities have deepened the severity of the financial crisis in an unprecedented manner, depriving the Yemeni people and their Government of the revenues necessary to pay salaries and provide services. The economic war waged by the militias is part of a broader aggressive strategy aimed at weakening the Government’s ability to provide basic services and pay public sector salaries, further exacerbating the humanitarian crisis for more than 14 million Yemenis. It is therefore important for the international community to seriously consider the disastrous effects of those terrorist acts, secure vital infrastructure and protect shipping vessels in Yemeni ports, in support of the right of Yemenis and their Government to benefit from their own national resources and improve their living conditions.
Protecting the arteries of the Yemeni economy is essential not only to the country’s recovery and future, but also to the stability of the region and global energy security in the long term. The Republic of Yemen therefore reiterates its call on the international community to provide urgent and comprehensive support to address the catastrophic humanitarian situation and lay the foundations for long-term economic recovery. That should include not only immediate humanitarian assistance to alleviate suffering and strengthen accountability mechanisms, especially in areas controlled by militias, but also greater investments in infrastructure, health care, education and sustainable development, and the enhancement of national capacities to mitigate the effects of climate change, which have claimed hundreds of victims and displaced thousands over the past two months.
Yemen’s recovery is not just a national issue, but a regional and global need, as its stability is crucial to maintaining peace, regional security and trade routes in the Red Sea, the Arabian Sea and surrounding waterways, including the Suez Canal. We have appreciated international support in the past and we will continue to express our gratitude to the international community — especially the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen, led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates — for assuming its moral responsibility to fulfil the aspirations of the Yemeni people to stability, peace and prosperity and provide the resources we need to rebuild their institutions and social fabric.
Today the Arab region faces a difficult test in the battle to build statehood and catch up with the progress of civilization, in accordance with the theme of the seventy-ninth session. However, whenever the countries of the region achieve true transformations towards development, peace, prosperity and empowering their peoples with their political, economic and social rights, the forces of evil emerge with their destructive agendas, encouraged by international leniency towards rogue groups and their supporters, who understand that response as indicating that they are on the right track to achieving their illegitimate aims. The outcome of that battle between the forces of peace and the axis of evil will determine who will survive and develop in that part of the world, cradle of the earliest human civilization, or whether t he region will descend into further chaos, civil wars, the dominance of militias, weapons, oppression and backwardness.
The road to peace requires support for the efforts of the forces of moderation in the region, led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has shouldered with our brothers in the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen the responsibility of defending international resolutions, extended a helping hand and opened its doors to receive millions of people fleeing war and armed conflicts. We are grateful to those countries, and the world should rely on them to lay the foundations of peace and stability and maximize the benefits our peoples derive from their amazing economic and social development. Accordingly, the false narratives about the Yemeni issue must end, especially those that minimize the role of Iran and the destabilizing effects of its weapons on the security and stability of Yemen, the region and the world.
The brutal Israeli war on the Palestinian people must end immediately, because that is the first step towards achieving the desired peace and exposing the pretexts of Iran and its proxies, which are exacerbating the situation in the region. Iran’s exploitation of the just Palestinian cause is not a recent development but arises from a history of blackmail and propaganda that have only led to disrupting the peace process and squandering the gains of the Palestinian people and their right to establish their independent, fully sovereign State.
As is the case for Yemen, the way to end the suffering of the Palestinian people must be based on the implementation of resolutions of international legitimacy, especially the Arab Peace Initiative. As is the case for both Yemen and Palestine, the only way to deter the brutal Israeli aggression against Lebanon will be through a firm stance of the international community, the unity of the Lebanese themselves, the independence of their decision-making and non-interference in their country’s internal affairs.
I recall that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights begins by affirming that, “recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.” Those values, ethics and national and international norms have been undermined by the grave violation perpetrated by the leaders of Al-Qaeda, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and the Houthi militias, who promise the world further destruction.
