We would like to take this opportunity to thank the General Assembly for giving us the chance to speak.
Thirty years ago, South Africa was born as a new nation, equal, united and free from apartheid. We adopted a new Constitution as the birth certificate of our new nation. Our first democratic elections brought the tyranny of apartheid to an end, a system that the General Assembly declared to be a crime against humanity. In adopting resolution 2202 A (XXI) in 1966, later endorsed by Security Council resolution 569 (1985), the United Nations was a beacon of hope in our quest for justice. The great wave of solidarity of the peoples of the world, led by the United Nations, turned the tide against apartheid.
Today democracy flourishes in South Africa. We have a progressive Constitution, an entrenched human rights culture and strong institutions. We have laws to advance equality and programmes to protect society’s most marginalized and vulnerable. We have continued to work to transform our economy so that it is in a more competitive position, creates jobs that attract more investment and benefits all. South Africa is a party to global treaties on human rights, gender equality, children’s rights and the protection of refugees and the environment. A few days ago, South Africa endorsed the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which charts a course for a better future for global governance and towards the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals. As a signatory to the Paris Climate Agreement, we are contributing our fair share to the global effort and have a just energy transition plan to guide our carbon journey and climate-resilient development. Through the African Union, we are working to advance its Agenda 2063. We are involved in mediation and conflict resolution across our continent and actively contribute to peacekeeping missions. Our political culture has evolved and continues to mature.
We have just held our seventh free and fair general election since the start of our democracy, paving the way for the formation of a Government of national unity. Ten political parties have coalesced around a common agenda for economic growth, job creation, poverty eradication and sustainable development. South Africa is in a new era of great promise. In what some have called our second miracle, South Africans of all races have rallied behind the Government of national unity. We are making headway in resolving some of our most pressing challenges. Our economy has started to improve, and investor confidence is on the rise. Our country’s prospects look bright, and we look to the future with great hope.
The South African story attests to the enduring role of the United Nations in global matters. In supporting our struggle, the United Nations affirmed the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the fundamental human rights, dignity and worth of every person and the equal rights of nations large and small. It reaffirmed the aspiration contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that we should strive for a world free of barbarous acts that outrage the conscience of humankind. Genocide was declared to be a stain on the conscience of the world, and the world community took a stand against genocide. Apartheid was declared a crime against humanity and a stain on the conscience of the world, and the United Nations took a stand against apartheid. They were seen as crimes against humanity then, and they continue to be crimes against humanity now.
It has been 11 months since the Hamas attack in which 1,200 people were killed and hostages taken. As South Africa, we condemned that attack. In response to the attack, Israel embarked on an act of collective punishment in its assault on the people of Gaza, and the torment of the people of Gaza has continued unabated. More than 41,000 Palestinians have been killed. Homes, hospitals, churches, mosques and schools lie destroyed. Famine and disease stalk the streets of Gaza. That cannot but shock our collective humanity. The violence that the Palestinian people are being subjected to is a grim continuation of the more than half a century of apartheid that Israel has perpetrated against Palestinians. We South Africans know what apartheid looks like. We lived through apartheid. We suffered and died under apartheid. We will not remain silent and watch as apartheid is perpetrated against others. Through the United Nations and the instruments it wields, we must end the suffering that Palestinians are being subjected to. We are called on to uphold the principles of the Charter and the fundamental tenets of international law, consistently and in their entirety. International law cannot be applied selectively. No one State is more equal than any other.
In December 2023, South Africa approached the International Court of Justice seeking an order to prevent Israel from committing genocide against the people of Gaza. We did so in terms of our obligations as a State party to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. We welcome the support that a number of countries have given to the case that we have launched at the International Court of Justice. The Court’s orders make it clear that that there is a plausible case of genocide against the people of Gaza. They further make it clear that States must also act to prevent genocide by Israel — and to ensure that they are not themselves party to violating the Genocide Convention by aiding or assisting in the commission of genocide. We reiterate our call for an immediate ceasefire and for the release of all hostages. The only lasting solution is the establishment of a Palestinian State, a State that will exist side by side with Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Our moral conscience further demands that we make every effort to bring peace to other countries as well, especially the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, Ukraine and other parts of the African continent. We must realize the aspirations of the people of Western Sahara to self-determination. Achieving and maintaining peace and security requires the collective will of the community of nations gathered here. It requires that the Security Council be a more representative and inclusive body. Seventy-eight years after its formation, the structure of the Security Council remains largely unchanged. Africa and its 1.4 billion people remain excluded from its key decision-making structures. That cannot continue. The Security Council has not fulfilled its mandate to maintain international peace and security, and it must be reformed as a matter of urgency. We would like to see the Security Council be more inclusive so that the voices of all nations can be heard and considered. It cannot remain an exclusive club of just five countries to the exclusion of the many other nations of the world. Africa stands ready to play its role in building a safer global order by participating in the work of the Security Council on a basis of respect and acceptance.
The African Union and its member States are engaged in mediation, dialogue and diplomacy across the continent with a view to creating conditions under which peace and development can take hold. There must be greater collaboration between the United Nations and the African Union in resolving a number of conflicts and in addressing the root causes of conflicts that continue to rage.
Pandemics and endemics pose a serious threat to us all. We are concerned about the spread of mpox across the world, and in Africa in particular. We urge the international community to mobilize vaccines and other medical countermeasures for deployment where they are most needed.
Economic prosperity is key to sustainable peace. Through the African Continental Free Trade Area, we are establishing the foundation for a massive increase in trade and investment in infrastructure on our continent. The Free Trade Area will further integrate regional economies and accelerate Africa’s industrialization and economic growth.
The climate crisis is now a full-blown emergency all over the world. Its effects have been devastating to many countries and their citizens. Extreme weather events such as floods, fires and droughts are wreaking havoc on societies, economies and the livelihoods of ordinary people. Despite being the least responsible for climate change, countries with developing economies, and particularly African countries, are bearing the brunt of what they did not create. They are on the front line. South Africa remains committed to contributing its fair share to reducing global emissions, guided by the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. We have adaptation and mitigation programmes and policies in place and have enacted a climate-change law to further support our emissions reduction targets. It is essential to ensure that climate actions do not deepen global inequality or stifle the development aspirations of the global South. The industrialized nations are not honouring their climate commitments, and we repeat the call for predictable and sustainable financing for climate action. We must operationalize the agreed-on climate financing and capacity-building instruments to advance mitigation and adaptation.
Pursing sustainable development requires that those with greater means support those who lack them. The world is facing an annual financing gap of some $4 trillion in the work of achieving sustainable development. We call on better-resourced countries to scale up their levels of support to developing countries. Debt is the millstone around the neck of many of those countries, stifling their potential and development. Debt servicing is robbing a number of countries of much-needed funds to support health, education and social spending. South Africa endorses the Secretary-General’s call for reforming the global financial architecture in order to enable developing-economy countries to lift themselves out of the quicksand of debt. We must commit to systems for financing development that are more accessible, agile and equitable. In 2025, South Africa will assume the presidency of the Group of 20. We will use that important role to advocate for the development and advancement of the peoples of Africa and all of the global South.
South Africa welcomes the adoption of the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), and we congratulate our sister country, Namibia, and the Federal Republic of Germany, on ably steering the Assembly towards its adoption. The Pact for the Future is a platform for us to focus on the actions we need to take together to build a world in which the equal worth of every person and every country is recognized and valued. We particularly welcome the commitments to putting poverty eradication at the centre of all our efforts and closing the Sustainable Development Goals financing gap in developing countries. The disparities in wealth and development within and between countries are simply unjust and unsustainable. We must continue to strive for equal treatment, opportunity and advancement for all individuals and nations.
The Pact for the Future must reinvigorate international solidarity. Like veins that carry sustenance to every part of the body, solidarity is the lifeblood of human progress. It binds us together to nourish the greater good. Achieving the greater good, for the common good, is what we all strive for. Through dialogue and respect for the rule of law, the advancement of human rights and cooperation and solidarity, we can and will be able to achieve a better world for all the world’s peoples.
