I congratulate Mr. Yang on his assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session and assure him of Zambia’s cooperation during his tenure.
We extend Zambia’s sincere gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis for his exemplary work during the seventy-eighth session.
The theme for this session, “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations”, presents an opportunity for us to re-examine our priorities, redefine our mission and sharpen our vision as we approach the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations. Zambia therefore joins the Secretary-General in congratulating Member States on successfully adopting the Pact for the Future (resolution 79/1), which includes the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future Generations. We further appreciate the work of Namibia and Germany in co-facilitating that process. It is our hope that the implementation of the Pact for the Future will address the multiple crises facing the world today.
Zambia firmly believes that multilateralism is the only viable approach to solving regional and international challenges. In that regard, the creation of the United Nations almost 80 years ago provided new hope for the international community in the maintenance of international peace and security, the promotion of justice and the improvement of living conditions for all people. However, that ideal is rapidly slipping away as global peace is increasingly threatened by the growing and sustained geopolitical tensions.
As Member States that share in the ideals upon which the United Nations was founded, we must resolve to correct that course and uphold the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The impact of conflict in some parts of the world has been felt across Africa through disruptions and the soaring prices of key commodities such as energy and other inputs of trade and production, resulting in an increased cost of living. Zambia, like many other developing countries which are predominantly import-dependent, has not been spared. It is therefore crucial that we address the root causes and structural drivers of conflict and promote peacebuilding efforts. We call on all warring parties to exercise restraint and flexibility for the sake of millions of civilians who are casualties of war and conflict. That call is particularly relevant to the raging conflicts in the Sudan, the Middle East and Ukraine.
At the regional level, Zambia held the chairmanship of Southern African Development Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation for the period August 2023 to August 2024, and therefore played a crucial role in the region in that capacity. Overall, the security and political situation in the region remains stable. However, there are still pockets of security challenges in some of our member States, such as the situation in the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Cabo Delgado province of Mozambique, which SADC remains seized with.
We implore the international community to support the various peacebuilding efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We further call for support to the Government of Mozambique in order to ensure that the exit of the SADC Mission in Mozambique does not result in reversal of the gains made by the Mission. Furthermore, Zambia recognizes the efforts of Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of the Republic of Angola, as the African Union mediator in the facilitation of the Luanda process aimed at restoring peace and Security in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the Nairobi process, which is also aimed at fostering peace in that country.
Climate change and extreme weather conditions threaten the very existence and balance of the world as we know it. It is clear that efforts to raise the standard of living for the world’s poor are being adversely affected by the effects of climate change. For instance, this year Zambia experienced its worst drought in recent times. That led the Government to declare the drought a national disaster and emergency to save lives and safeguard livelihoods. We take this opportunity to thank all our bilateral and multilateral partners who graciously responded to the clarion call to support Zambia’s drought response strategy. That and similar scenarios in our region underscore the need to build local resilience and climate adaptation through various interventions including, among others, climate financing from both public and private sources. In that regard, the need for the full actualization of the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage to help developing countries cope with climate-related disasters and extreme weather events cannot be overemphasized. We urge Member States to focus their energies on achieving measurable outcomes at the forthcoming twenty-ninth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change accordingly.
It is becoming increasingly apparent that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) may not be met by 2030, as only 17 per cent of the SDG targets are on track, while the remaining 83 per cent are either stagnating or regressing. Therefore, Zambia joins calls for massive investment and scaled-up action in order to close the financing gap, which is currently estimated to be around $4 trillion. Failure to close the gap will adversely impact future generations. In the same vein, we call on the international community to scale up financing for developing countries to achieve the SDGs, including by honouring commitments to contribute at least 0.7 per cent of gross national income towards official development assistance. Further, the heavy burden of debt in some developing countries presents another major hurdle to the attainment of the SDGs, especially in Africa. Those countries face a high risk of debt distress. There is need, therefore, for an effective debt work-out mechanism that supports payment suspensions, longer lending terms and lower interest rates.
Based on Zambia’s experience, we call for further reforms to streamline the existing Group of 20 Framework for Debt Treatments in order to enhance certainty and reduce the time it takes to conclude the process. Zambia further joins calls for the reform of the international financial architecture to make it fit for purpose and equitably address the development needs of all countries in the twenty-first century. Additionally, there is need to build capacities for least developed countries to access other innovative financing measures such as debt-for-climate swaps and green and blue bonds, among others. Furthermore, Zambia joins other SADC member States in the call for a review of the use of unilateral economic instruments that curtail the access of developing countries to development financing.
Aggressive tax avoidance and tax evasion have a corrosive effect on public trust, financial integrity, the rule of law and sustainable development across the globe. International tax cooperation could significantly reduce illicit financial flows, a scourge that deprives economies, especially those in the developing world, of funding for development. Zambia therefore calls for the urgent conclusion of negotiations on the proposed United Nations framework convention on international tax cooperation. That will enable developing countries to enhance their domestic resource mobilization. As co-facilitator of the negotiations of the outcome document for the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development in the coming months, we look forward to actively engaging with Member States in the reform of the international architecture.
Science and technology are critical to achieving the SDGs. Developing countries’ lack of access to technology has hindered the implementation of sustainable development practices, thereby perpetuating the cycle of poverty and inequality. Hence, there is a need to bridge the gap in digital technologies, including artificial intelligence, to promote efficiencies in health, climate, sustainable infrastructure, energy, agriculture and other global development priorities. In that regard, we call for enhanced international cooperation to support developing countries in integrating technology through capacity-building, technology transfer on mutually agreed terms, information exchange and investments in research and development.
Alongside the Pact for the Future, Member states adopted the Global Digital Compact. Zambia was honoured to partner with Sweden in leading negotiations on that historic document.
As part of its efforts to accelerate the attainment of the SDGs by 2030, Zambia has been implementing policies and programmes aimed at creating a strong and resilient health system, reducing inequalities, eradicating poverty and empowering women and girls. That is also consistent with the implementation of the International Conference on Population and Development Programme of Action. Zambia welcomes the Declaration on Future Generations, which seeks to secure the well-being of future generations, in particular their participation in decision-making. To reap the demographic dividend, Zambia continues to call for significant investments in the growing youth population, currently standing at 82 per cent below the age of 35. Increased investments are needed in the education, health care and empowerment of young people so that they can meaningfully contribute to the achievement of the SDGs.
Child, early and forced marriage is a harmful practice that disproportionately affects girls, hindering their education, health and overall well-being. In that regard, Zambia continues to make strides in the campaign to end child marriage by 2030 and safeguard the rights of girls by enacting relevant legislation to address that vice. President Hakainde Hichilema being the African Union Champion on Ending Child Marriage, Zambia is pleased to report that the campaign is growing from strength to strength, with 32 of the 54 countries on the continent having launched national campaigns to end child marriage. However, much more needs to be done. We call on all partners to join efforts and raise our voices to protect our children to end that harmful practice by 2030.
In the face of the present geopolitical realities and calls to strengthen multilateralism, the need to reform the Security Council cannot be over emphasized. Reforms are necessary to make the Security Council better equipped and strengthened in its capacity to discharge its responsibilities of maintaining and safeguarding international peace and security. The representation of African States in the permanent category would correct the historical injustice that has marginalized Africa’s voice and provide a vital perspective to the Council.
The time has come for the Security Council to be representative, democratic and accountable to all Member States, irrespective of status. That is essential to its integrity as the custodian of international peace. Given that Africa constitutes the second largest bloc of the United Nations membership, proposals to reform the Security Council should heed Africa’s call as espoused in the Common Africa Position, as enshrined in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. In that regard, we are pleased to note that the African Union Committee of Ten and the five permanent members of the Security Council held a meeting during this session of the General Assembly. Such interactions should be encouraged in order to narrow the gap on the Security Council reforms,
Finally, I wish to reaffirm that Zambia remains committed to strengthened multilateralism as a means of addressing the numerous global challenges affecting our people, including ending poverty and creating wealth in a sustainable manner. To that end, we should not remain indecisive or indifferent to that serious issue, nor should we forego this opportunity to make the world a better place for all humankind.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need for us to seriously consider the call for massive investment and scaled-up action if we are to make meaningful progress in achieving the SDGs, including the implementation of the Pact for the Future.
